# 8.3 Space-Charge Effects

For a beam with an input current > 0, space-charge effects will be included in the simulation. (0 current means no space-charge effects.) By default, the code assumes that the beam has an azimuthal symmetry. This allows the use of a smaller number of macroparticles in the simulation, which reduces the computation time significantly. For a fully 3D beam, an input line with type code "-5" should be inserted in the input file `ImpactT.in` (see more explanation in the beam line element section). This line starts the 3D simulation after a given location in the input file. To turn on the 3D space-charge effects right at the beginning, that location needs to be set `< 0`. The electron beam out of the cathode can have a large energy spread. In this case, the quasi-static approximation using one reference frame might not be sufficient. Multiple reference frames (also called energy bins) can be used so that within each reference frame the energy spread is small. The total space-charge forces are the summation of contributions from all reference frames. In the current version of IMPACT-T, the multiple reference frames are modeled as multiple bunches. For modeling the beam dynamics in photoinjector, the initial distribution can be divided into multiple slice longitudinally so that each slice after the emission will have a small energy spread. These slices can be merged together after some distance when the total relative energy spread becomes small (see BPM -7 for usage).

The space-charge forces are calculated by solving the 3D Poisson equation with open boundary conditions using an integrated Green function method. The image charge effects of the conducting cathode are also included using a shifted Green function method. A detailed description of the space-charge solver can be found in reference [1].
