# 8.4 Short Range Longitudinal and Transverse Wakefields

Besides the space-charge forces, the short range longitudinal wake field (monopole) and transverse wake field (dipole) are also included. To include the wakefield effects, the element type "-6" needs to be used (see the BPM explanation). Note: the wakefield module works correctly only for one bin/slice model. To turn on the wakefields, the multiple bins have to be merged into one bin by using BPM "-7" function.

The effective forces from the wake fields are given as:

```
Fx(s) = q * ∫[s to ∞] WT(s' - s) * x(s') * λ(s') ds'

Fy(s) = q * ∫[s to ∞] WT(s' - s) * y(s') * λ(s') ds'

Fz(s) = q * ∫[s to ∞] WL(s' - s) * λ(s') ds'
```

where `W_T` is the transverse wake function, `W_L` is the longitudinal wake field function, and `λ` is the line density function of the beam. To compute the effective forces from wake fields more efficiently, we extend the above integrals into a full domain convolution as:

```
F(s) = ∫[-∞ to +∞] G(s' - s) * ρ(s') ds'
```

where:

```
G(s) = W(s)  for s >= 0
       0      for s < 0

ρ(s) = x(s)*λ(s)  for transverse wake
       y(s)*λ(s)  for transverse wake
       λ(s)       for longitudinal wake
```

The above convolution is calculated using an FFT-based method on a doubled computational domain.

The transverse and longitudinal wake functions can be calculated following some analytical expressions or be read in from external files. For analytical representation, the transverse and longitudinal wake functions for the SLAC 2π/3 DDS structure is given by [3]:

```
W_T(s) = (4*Z0*c*s0) / (π*a⁴) * φ(s) * (1 - (1 + sqrt(s/s0)) * exp(-sqrt(s/s0)))

W_L(s) = (Z0*c) / (π*a²) * φ(s) * exp(-sqrt(s/s00))
```

with:

```
s0  = 0.169 * a^1.79 * g^0.38 / L^1.17

s00 = (g/8) * (a / (α(g/L)*L))²

α(s) = 1 - α1*sqrt(s) - (1 - 2α1)*s
```

with `α1 = 0.4648`. Here, the structure parameters are iris radius `a`, gap `g`, period `L`, and `Z0 = 120π`, `φ(s)` is a step function of s (`φ(s) = 1` for `s > 0`, `0` for `s < 0`).

For the BTW accelerating structure at the ELETTRA linac, the transverse and longitudinal wake functions are [4]:

```
W_T(s) = 2.8×10¹⁶ * φ(s) * ((1 - (1 + sqrt(s/1.2×10⁻⁴)) * exp(-sqrt(s/1.2×10⁻⁴)))) + 0.5*sqrt(s)

W_L(s) = 1.0×10¹² * φ(s) * (1226*exp(-sqrt(s/3×10⁻⁴)) + 0.494/sqrt(s) + 494*sqrt(s))
```

For read-in external wake function option (see "-6" of BPM), the data has to be uniformly distributed between 0 and L with maximum data number 1000.
