# 8.9 Bending Magnet

The bending magnet in the IMPACT-T code is modeled as a constant vertical field region and two fringe field regions on both ends of the magnet. At the entrance of the bending magnet, a Cartesian coordinate is set. The pole faces of the bending magnet at the entrance and the exit are described by four linear equations:

```
z = kᵢ*x + bᵢ   (i = 1, 2, 3, 4)
```

where `i` is from 1 to 4 corresponding to the four edge lines defining the fringe field and center field region. For a bending magnet defined with entrance angle `φ1`, bending angle `θ`, and exit angle `φ2`, the above `kᵢ` and `bᵢ` can be obtained by:

```
b1 = 0
b2 = Δ / cos(φ1)
b3 = Δ/(2*cos(φ1)) + R*sin(θ) + (R - R*cos(θ))*tan(θ - φ2) - Δ/(2*cos(θ - φ2))
b4 = b3 + Δ / cos(θ - φ2)
k1 = -tan(φ1)
k2 = k1
k3 = -tan(θ - φ2)
k4 = k3
```

where `Δ` is the width of the fringe field region and `R` is bending radius of the flat field region. Note: the sign of the entrance or exit angle needs to be checked.

The mid-plane field inside the fringe region of exit is assumed to be an Enge function [14]:

```
By(0, 0, z) / By0 = 1 / (1 + exp(c1 + c2*s + c3*s² + c4*s³ + c5*s⁴ + c6*s⁵ + c7*s⁶ + c8*s⁷))
```

where `s = (z - z0)/g`, `g` is the full gap width, `z` is the distance measured perpendicular to the pole face `L3`. Here, the shift in `z0` is the half of the input parameters 11 and 12 inside the `rfdata` file. The coefficients (absolute values) of the Enge function for the fringe field at the entrance are assumed to be the same as the exit ones except that the shift is controlled by the input parameter 11. The coefficients `c1` to `c8` are obtained from the least square fitting of the measured data profile.

A reference particle is defined with only initial longitudinal components from the centroid of the beam in the local coordinate system. Inside the bend, both simulated macroparticles and the reference particle are advanced using the dipole magnetic field. To calculate the space-charge forces or CSR forces, we transform the macroparticles coordinates into a coordinate system originating at the reference particle through rotation. A momentum kick is done inside the reference particle coordinate system and transformed back to the local coordinate system. When the beam is out of the bending magnet, all macroparticles are rotated again into the reference particle coordinate system in the next beam line element. Here, we have assumed that the reference particle will move through the axis of the bending magnet and into the axis of the next element.
