# `PTC` Commands
## `PTC` Set-up Parameters

The Polymorphic Tracking Code of Etienne Forest is a kick code, allowing a symplectic integration through all accelerator elements giving the user full control over the precision (number of steps and integration type) and exactness (full or extended Hamiltonian) of the results. The degree of exactness is determined by the user and the speed of his computer. The main advantage is that the code is inherently based on the map formalism and provides users with all associated tools.

The `PTC` code is actually a library that can be used in many different ways to create an actual module that calculates some property of interest.

**Attention:** `PTC` exists inside of `MAD-X` as a library. `MAD-X` offers the interface to `PTC`, *i.e.* the `MAD-X` input file is used as input for `PTC`. Internally, both `PTC` and `MAD-X` have their own independent databases which are linked via the interface. With the [`PTC_CREATE_LAYOUT`](#sec:ptc-create-layout) command, only numerical values are transferred from the `MAD-X` data structures to the `PTC` data structures. Any modification to the `MAD-X` data structure is unknown to `PTC` until the next call to [`PTC_CREATE_LAYOUT`](#sec:ptc-create-layout). For example, a [deferred expression](#sec:defer) of `MAD-X` is only evaluated at the time of the [`PTC_CREATE_LAYOUT`](#sec:ptc-create-layout) command and is ignored within `PTC` afterwards.

Several modules using the PTC code have been presently implemented in `MAD-X`. These `MAD-X`-`PTC` modules are executed by the following commands: [`PTC_TWISS`](#chap:ptc-twiss), [`PTC_NORMAL`](#chap:ptc-normal), [`PTC_TRACK`](#chap:ptc-track), [`PTC_TRACK_LINE`](#sec:ptc-trackline).

To perform calculations with these `MAD-X`-`PTC` commands, the `PTC` environment must be initialized, handled and turned off by special commands within the `MAD-X` input script.

### Command Synopsis

A typical set of commands to invoke `PTC` is given below:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> PTC_CREATE_UNIVERSE, S̄ECTOR_NMUL_MAX= integer, SECTOR_NMUL= integer,\
> NTPSA= logical, SYMPRINT= logical;\
> \
> PTC_CREATE_LAYOUT, T̄IME= logical, MODEL= integer,\
> METHOD= integer, NST= integer, EXACT= logical,\
> OFFSET_DELTAP= double, ERRORS_OUT= logical,\
> MAGNET_NAME= string, RESPLIT= logical,\
> THIN= double, XBEND= double,\
> EVEN = logical;\
> ...\
> PTC_MOVE_TO_LAYOUT, INDEX= integer;\
> ...\
> PTC_READ_ERRORS, OVERWRITE= logical;\
> ...\
> PTC_ALIGN;\
> ...\
> PTC_END;
>
> </div>

### PTC_CREATE_UNIVERSE

The `PTC_CREATE_UNIVERSE` command is required to set-up the `PTC` environment.

> 

The attributes are:

a global variable in `PTC` needed for exact sector bends defining up to which order Maxwell’s equation are solved (see  page 76-77). The value of `SECTOR_NMUL_MAX` must not be smaller than `SECTOR_NMUL` otherwise `MAD-X` stops with an error. If a negative value is passed than it is identified automatically by scanning the currently selected sequence.\
(Default: -1)

a global variable in PTC needed for exact sector bends defining up to which order the multipole are included in solving Maxwell’s equation up to order `SECTOR_NMUL_MAX`. Multipoles of order N with N $`>`$ `SECTOR_NMUL` and N $`\leq`$ `SECTOR_NMUL_MAX` are treated similar to *SixTrack*. If a negative value of\
`SECTOR_NMUL_MAX` is passed than it is also identified automatically. However, if multipolar parameters of the bends are to be modified inside the PTC universe, for example with `PTC_READ_ERRORS`, than this parameter needs to be set to a corresponding value. Please note that using large values (above 10) slows down the computations, so the smallest required value should be used.\
(Default:-1)

invokes the Differential Algebra (DA) package written in C++ and kindly provided by Lingyun Yang (lyyang@lbl.gov).\
Etienne Forest has written the wrapper to allow the use of both the legendary DA package written in Fortran by Martin Berz (default) and this new DA package of Lingyun Yang. It is expected that this DA package will allow for the efficient calculation of a large number of DA parameters.\
(Default: false)

a flag to enable the printing of the check of symplecticity. It is recommended to leave this flag set to TRUE.\
(Default: true)

### PTC_CREATE_LAYOUT

The `PTC_CREATE_LAYOUT` command creates the `PTC`-layout according to the specified integration method and fills it with the current `MAD-X` sequence defined in the latest [`USE`](#sec:use) command.

> 

The attributes are:

a logical flag to control which coordinate system is being used.\
(Default= true)\
\
Please see `TIME` of [`PTC_SETSWITCH`](#sec:ptc-setswitch) command for more details.

an integer to switch between models:\
1 for "Drift-Kick-Drift"; (Default value)\
2 for "Matrix-Kick-Matrix" and\
3 for "Delta-Matrix-Kick-Matrix" (SixTrack-code model).

the integration order: 2, 4, or 6 (See  Chapter K)\
(Default: 2)

the number of integration steps. (Default: 1)\
The body of each element is divided into `NST` equal slices and Forest-Yoshida integration is carried out on each slice. For best results `NST` should increase with strength and length of elements. The optimum `NST` value corresponds to the value beyond which the studied properties no longer change. However, for time consuming calculations the user may reduce `NST`. (See below the `RESPLIT` option for automatic adjustment.)\
This attribute sets the same `NST` value for all "thick" elements ($`l > 0`$) of a beam-line; however each individual element may also have its own `NST` value defined independently ([see below](#sec:add-option-PTC)).

a logical flag to turn on calculations with an exact Hamiltonian, otherwise the expanded Hamiltonian is used.\
(Default: false)

**\[ Beware: Expert attribute! \]** provides relative momentum deviation of the reference particle (6D case ONLY). This option implies `TOTALPATH=true`.\
(Default: 0.0)

a logical flag to write-out multipolar errors in [`EFCOMP`](#sec:efcomp) table format.\
(Default: false)\
Two tables are created and filled: "errors_field" contains only field errors, "errors_total" contains also desired field components, which can include the strength of correctors. The choice of magnets is defined by the `MAGNET_NAME` attribute (see below). The tables can be [written](#sec:write) to file, and can be read back via the `ERRORS_IN` flag.\
The `ERRORS_IN` flag has precedence over this `ERRORS_OUT` flag.

a string giving a simple selection for the names of magnet to be used for an error write-out using the `ERRORS_OUT` flag (see above). The errors are recorded for all magnets with names starting with the exact string given here, which would be equivalent to the ??? regular expression.\
(Default: nil)

a logical flag to apply the `PTC` resplit procedure. This is meant to create an "adaptive" setting of the `METHOD` and `NST` attributes according to the strengths of quadrupoles (using the `THIN` attribute) and dipoles (using the `XBEND` attribute). The `EVEN` attribute further controls the number of splits.\
(Default: false)

is the main `RESPLIT` attribute and is meant for splitting quadrupoles according to their strength. The default value `THIN=0.001` has shown in practice to work well without costing too much with respect of performance.

is an optional `RESPLIT` attribute and is meant for splitting dipoles. A value `XBEND=0.001` is also advisable for dipoles.\
(Default: -1.0 for no splitting)

a logical switch to ensure even number of splits when using the `RESPLIT` procedure of `PTC`, which is particularly useful when one attempts to calculate `PTC_TWISS` with the `CENTER_MAGNETS` option, i.e. to calculate the `TWISS` parameters in the center of the element. Uneven number of splits is ensured with `EVEN=false`. (Default: true)

### PTC_SETSWITCH

The `PTC_SETSWITCH` command allows to set some global `PTC` states and to configure the interface between `MAD-X` and `PTC`, adapting the behavior of the program to the needs.

> 

The command parameters and switches are:

(Default: 1)\
Sets the level of debugging printout: 0 prints none, 4 prints everything

(Default: false)\
Switch ensures exact misalignment treatment.

(Default: false)\
If true, the 6th variable of PTC, i.e. 5th of MAD-X, is the total path.\
If false it is deviation from the reference particle, which is normally the closed orbit for closed layouts.\
This switch changes behaviour of the RF cavities, including RF multipoles and crab cavities. If it is false, the time of flight effect between the cavities (or the ring length) is ignored because the kick is proportional to\
$`sin(2\pi \cdot \rm{FREQ} \cdot t/c + \rm{LAG})`$, where $`t`$ is the time coodinate. So only distance from the synchronous particle plays a role. For example, changing ring length will not affect the cavity. On the other hand, it gurantees that the defined LAG is observed. Conversely, if `TOTALPATH` is true then $`t`$ becomes the total time of flight so its effect is accounted for. In the case when cavity is detuned the closed orbit momentum will change and in ray tracking phase slippage from turn to turn will be seen. However, `LAG` of cavities needs to be carefuly calculated because its phasing will depend on its position. Naturally, in cases with only one RF cavity the closed orbit search will automatically determine the offset.

(Default: false)\
Sets the radiation switch/internal state of PTC. In PTC basically all the elements radiate including sextupoles, solenoids and orbit correctors.

(Default: false)\
Sets the envelope switch/internal state of PTC. It allows to calculate dumping due to radiation and stochastic effects. Warning: this makes the tracking approximately twice slower, so low order should be used.

(Default: false)\
Sets the stochastic switch/internal state of PTC. It enables stochastic emission of photons in ray tracking, it only affects `PTC_TRACK` and `PTC_TRACKLINE`. The emission is calculated during map tracking therefore `PTC_TWISS` or `PTC_NORMAL` needs to be invoked before launching the tracking (also with `RADIATION`, `ENVELOPE` and `STOCHASTIC` set to true). Every tracked ray will receive the same stochastic kicks.

(Default: false)\
Sets the modulation switch/internal state of PTC. It needs to be set to true to observe effect of AD dipoles.

(Default: false)\
Sets the fringe switch/internal state of PTC.\
If true the influence of the fringe fields is evaluated for quadrupole fringe fields based on the $`b_2`$ and $`a_2`$ components of the element.

Please note that currently fringe fields are always taken into account for some elements (e.g. traveling wave cavities) even if this flag is set to false. The detailed list of elements will be provided later, when the situation in this matter will be definitely settled.

(Default: true)\
If true, Selects time of flight (*cT* to be precise) rather than path length as the 6th variable of PTC, i.e. 5th of MAD-X.\
This option changes the canonical coordinate system depending whether the calculation is done in 5D or 6D:

if `TIME` is true, the fifth coordinate is [`PT`](#subsec:tables-canon), $`p_t = \Delta E / p_0 c`$\
if `TIME` is false, the fifth coordinate is [`DELTAP`](#subsec:tables-canon), $`\delta_p = \Delta p / p_0`$

if `TIME` is true, the [`MAD-X` coordinate system](#subsec:tables-canon) {$`-ct`$, $`p_t`$} is used.\
if `TIME` is false, the second `PTC` coordinate system {-pathlength, $`\delta_p`$} is used.

**Note:** at small energy ($`\beta_0 << 1`$), momentum-dependent variables like dispersion will depend strongly on the choice of the logical input variable `TIME`. In fact, the derivative ($`\frac{\partial}{\partial \delta_p}`$) and ($`\frac{\partial}{\partial p_t}`$) are different by the factor $`\beta_0`$. One would therefore typically choose the option `TIME=false`, which sets the fifth variable to the relative momentum deviation $`\delta_p`$.

(Default: 123456789)\
Sets the seed of PTC random number generator, which is independent from the MADX generators.

(Default: true)\
Switch to set cavities phases so the reference orbit is always on the crest, i.e. gains max energy.

### PTC_MOVE_TO_LAYOUT

Several `PTC` layouts can be created within a single `PTC`-"universe". The layouts are automatically numbered with sequential integers by the `MAD-X` code. The `PTC_MOVE_TO_LAYOUT` command is used to activate a specific layout, and the next `PTC` commands will be applied to this active `PTC` layout until a new `PTC` layout is created or activated.

> 

The only attribute is:

is the numeric index of the `PTC` layout to be activated.\
(Default: 1)

### PTC_READ_ERRORS

The `PTC_READ_ERRORS` command reads any number of **"errors_read"** table through the [`READTABLE`](#sec:readtable) mechanism.

> 

The only attribute is

a flag to specify that the read-in errors overwrite previous errors instead of adding the read-in errors to existing errors, ie multipole components already present.\
(Default: false)

**Note:**\
For calculations with exact flag set to true, `SECTOR_NMUL` parameter of `PTC_CREATE_UNIVERSE` needs to be set to a value bigger than the highest order of an error in bending magnets.

**Note:**\
Because of the way the table is read in memory, a warning will always be issued by default in the form:

    warning: string_from_table_row: row out of range: errors_read->name[1>=n+1<=n]

where `n` is the number of records read from the table. This warning has no consequence on the errors read and the following calculation.\
The warning is purely the result of the way that the reading loop is programmed with a break based on the return value of the routine *string_from_table_row*. But if *string_from_table_row* tries to read in a row (`n+1`) past the last row (`n`) of the table, it prints a warning before returning a value that will effectively break the loop. Of course this will only happen if the `WARN` option is true and this can be turned off with

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> OPTION, -WARN;
>
> </div>

### PTC_ALIGN

The `PTC_ALIGN` command is used to apply the `MAD-X` alignment errors to the current PTC layout, and takes no attributes.

> 

### PTC_END

The `PTC_END` command turns off the `PTC` environment, which releases all memory and returns control to the `MAD-X` world proper.

> 

### Additional Options for Physical Elements

For some of the `MAD-X` elements, additional attributes can be defined that are available to `PTC` only. `PTC` also uses standard `MAD-X` attributes in a slightly different way.

> 

These attributes are:

the length of the element.\
`PTC` treats bending magnets ([`SBEND`](#sec:bend) or [`RBEND`](#sec:bend)) as [`MARKER`](#sec:marker) if their length is equal to zero.

gives a specific [`NST`](#sec:ptc-twiss) values for a particular "thick" element ($`L > 0`$).\
\
For example RF cavities are represented in `MAD-X` by a single kick, while `PTC` splits the RF cavity into `NST` segments thereby taking into account properly the transit-time effects of the cavity. Specifying explicitly `NST=1` for RF cavity reproduces in `PTC` the approximate results of `MAD-X`, ignoring transit time effects.\

The full range of normal and skew multipole components on the bench can be specified for the following physical elements: [`sbend`](#sec:bend), [`rbend`](#sec:bend), [`quadrupole`](#sec:quadrupole), [`sextupole`](#sec:sextupole), [`octupole`](#sec:octupole) and [`solenoid`](#sec:solenoid). `KNL` and `KSL` multipole coefficients are specified as the integrated value ($`\int K ds`$) of the field components along the magnet axis. The multipole components in `PTC` are spread over the length of thick elements. This is a considerable advantage of `PTC` input compared to `MAD-X` which allows only [thin multipoles](#sec:multipole).

is an array representing the normal multipole coefficients.\
(Default: 0 m$`^{-1}`$)

is an array representing the skew multipole coefficients.\
(Default: 0 m$`^{-1}`$) To preserve the reference orbit of straight elements, the dipole components for those elements are ignored and must be specified as zero: `KNL(0)=0, KSL(0)=0`.

A full range of additional multipole [field errors](#sec:efcomp) can be additionally specified with the [`EFCOMP`](#sec:efcomp) command. Errors are added to the above multipole fields on the bench.
