# `PTC` Commands
## Ripken Optics Parameters

### Introduction

The **PTC_TWISS module** of `MAD-X` is based on the `PTC` code and is supplementary to the [`TWISS`](#chap:twiss) module of `MAD-X`. In `PTC_TWISS` the Twiss parameters are calculated according to the formalism of G. Ripken, developped in and most accessible in .

`PTC_TWISS` tracks a special representation of the beam in three degrees of freedom. It works on the coupled lattice functions which are essentially the projections of the lattice functions for the eigen-modes on the three planes.

`PTC_TWISS` lists the projections of the ellipses of motion onto the three planes ($`x`$, $`p_x`$), ($`y`$, $`p_y`$), ($`t`$, $`p_t`$) expressed via Ripken’s parameters $`b_{k,j}`$, $`a_{k,j}`$, $`g_{k,j}`$ along with the phase advances $`m_j`$ in selected positions, where index $`k=1 ... 3`$ refers to the plane ($`x`$, $`y`$, ...), and the index $`j= 1 ... 3`$ denotes the eigen-mode.

The `PTC_TWISS` command also calculates the dispersion values $`D_1`$, ... ,$`D_4`$.

In `MAD-X` commands and tables, these parameters are denoted as `beta11, ..., beta33`, `alfa11, ..., alfa33`, `gama11, ..., gama33`, `mu1, ..., mu3`, `disp1, ..., disp4`, respectively.

The Ripken parametrization can be transformed into the Edwards-Teng parametrization (used in the module [`TWISS`](#chap:twiss) of `MAD-X`) using the formulae of Lebedev .

The parameters are noted as `betx, bety, alfx, alfy` and the coupling matrix: `R11, R12, R21` and `R22`. In absence of coupling, the following holds: `betx = beta11`, `bety = beta22`, `alfx = alfa11` and `alfy = alfa22`.

`PTC_TWISS` can also compute the $`\Delta p/p_0`$ (or $`\Delta E/p_0 c`$ if time=TRUE) dependency of the Twiss parameters. The column names `beta11p, ..., beta33p, alfa11p, ..., alfa33p, gama11p, ..., gama33p` denote the derivatives of the optics parameters with respect to $`\Delta p/p_0`$ (or $`\Delta E/p_0 c`$ if time=TRUE).

In order to evaluate the $`\Delta p/p_0`$-dependency of the Twiss parameters, the order (`NO`) of the map must set to at least 2.

The derivatives of the dispersion with respect to $`\Delta p/p_0`$ (or $`\Delta E/p_0 c`$ if time=TRUE) have column names: `disp1p, ..., disp4p`. Second and third order derivatives have respective column names: `disp1p2, ..., disp4p2` for the second order, and `disp1p3, ..., disp4p3` for the third order.

In addition, `PTC` computes the momentum compaction factor $`\alpha_c`$ (`ALPHA_C`) and time slip factor $`\eta_c`$. Higher order derivatives of compaction factor with respect to $`\Delta p/p_0`$ up to urder 4 (`ALPHA_C_P`, `ALPHA_C_P2` and `ALPHA_C_P3`) are computed f `ICASE=56` and `time=false`, prividing the order of calculation as defined by `NO` switch is high enough. The values appear in the header of the `PTC_TWISS` output file, and a value of -1000000 means the value has not been computed.

For clarification: in the 4-D case, there is the following correspondence between MAD-X and the Ripken’s notations: `beta11` $`\equiv \beta_{xI}`$, `beta12` $`\equiv \beta_{xII}`$, `beta21` $`\equiv \beta_{yI}`$, `beta22` $`\equiv \beta_{yII}`$. In the uncoupled 4-D case, `beta11` is the same as the classical $`\beta_x`$ (`betx`) and `beta22` is $`\beta_y`$ (`bety`), while `beta12` and `beta21` are zero. in the coupled case all `betaNN` are non-zero and `beta11`, `beta22` are distinctively different from $`\beta_x`$, $`\beta_y`$, respectively.

`PTC_TWISS` also tracks the eigenvectors and prints them to Twiss table according to the [`SELECT`](#sec:select) command with `FLAG=ptc_twiss`. Either all 36 components or particular components of the eigenvectors can be selected with `EIGN` or `EIGNij`, respectively (`j` = number of eigenvector, `i` = number of coordinate {$`x`$, $`p_x`$, $`y`$, $`p_y`$, $`t`$, $`p_t`$}).

For ring lattices, `PTC_TWISS` computes momentum compaction, transition energy, as well as other one-turn characteristics such as the tunes (Q1, Q2 and if `ICASE=6` with cavity, Qs) and chromaticities (for `NO`$`\geq 2`$).

**Synopsis:**

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> PTC_CREATE_UNIVERSE;\
> PTC_CREATE_LAYOUT, MODEL=integer, METHOD=integer, NST=integer, \[EXACT\];\
> ...\
> SELECT, FLAG=ptc_twiss, CLEAR;\
> SELECT, F̄LAG=ptc_twiss, COLUMN=name, s,\
> beta11,...,beta33, alfa11,...,alfa33, gama11,...,gama33,\
> beta11p,...,beta33p, alfa11p,...,alfa33p, gama11p,...,gama33p,\
> mu1,...,mu3,\
> disp1,...,disp4, disp1p,...,disp4p,\
> disp1p2,...,disp4p2, disp1p3,...,disp4p3,\
> , eign11,...,eign16,...,eign61,...,eign66;\
> ...\
> PTC_TWISS;\
> ...\
> PTC_END;
>
> </div>

### PTC_TWISS

The `PTC_TWISS` command causes computation of the Twiss parameters in Ripken’s style. It operates on the working beam line defined in the latest [`USE`](#sec:use) command.

Applications for the `PTC_TWISS` command are similar to the [`TWISS`](#chap:twiss) command of `MAD-X`. The `PTC_TWIS`S can be applied to two basic tasks. It can calculate either a [periodic solution](#sec:ptc-twiss-periodic) or a [solution with initial conditions](#sec:ptc-twiss-sol-initial-cond).

> 

The attributes are:

the dimensionality of the phase-space (4, 5 or 6). (Default: 4)\
Note that `ICASE` is internally set to 56 when attempting to set `ICASE=6` with no cavity, and `ICASE` is internally set to 4 when attempting to set `ICASE=6` with an RF cavity with zero voltage.

the order of the map. (Default: 1)\
For evaluating the derivatives of the Twiss parameter w.r.t. $`\Delta p/p_0`$, e.g. for evaluating the chromaticities, the order must be at least equal to 2.

relative momentum offset for reference closed orbit. (Default: 0.0)

a logical switch to trigger the closed orbit calculation (applies to [periodic solution](#sec:ptc-twiss-periodic) ONLY).\
(Default: false)

a logical switch to trigger the computation of the Twiss and dispersion derivatives w.r.t. $`\Delta p/p_0`$. Derivation formula assume that `ICASE `$`\ge`$` 5`, so that $`\Delta p/p_0`$ is supplied as a parameter.\
(Default: false)

a logical switch to activate the evaluation of Twiss parameters at each integration step inside magnets, in addition to the end face. The number of slices is determined by the number of steps (`NST`) that can be separately defined for each element, or otherwise set by `NST` parameter when creating the PTC layout. Note that the orbit rms calculated in this mode counts as valid data points both the end of the previous element and the entrance of the current element. Since the first integration node is always at the entrance of the magnet (after position offset and fringe effects are calculated) which corresponds to the same s position (and usually optical functions) as the end of the previous element, the points at the interface between magnets are included twice in the rms calculation.\
(Default: false)

a logical switch to activate the evaluation of Twiss parameters at the middle of each magnet. This relies on internal slicing and ’integration nodes’ as determined by the number of steps (`NST`) selected when creating the PTC layout. This number is assumed to be even otherwise the program issues a warning.\
(Default: false)

if the `FILE` attribute is omitted, no output is written to file.\
If the `FILE` attribute name is present, the optional attribute value argument is the name of the file for printing the `PTC_TWISS` output. The default file name is "ptc_twiss".\
(Default: false)

if the `TABLE` attribute is omitted, no output is written to an internal table.\
If the `TABLE` attribute name is present, the optional attribute value argument is the name of the internal table for `PTC_TWISS` variables. The default table name is "ptc_twiss".\
(Default: false)

if the `SUMMARY_FILE` attribute is omitted, no summary output is written to file.\
If the `SUMMARY_FILE` attribute name is present, the optional attribute value argument is the name of the file for printing the `PTC_TWISS_SUMMARY` table output. The default file name is "ptc_twiss_summary".\
(Default: false)

if the `SUMMARY_TABLE` attribute is omitted, no summary output is written to an internal table.\
If the `SUMMARY_TABLE` attribute name is present, the optional attribute value argument is the name of the internal summary table for `PTC_TWISS_SUMMARY` variables. The default table name is "ptc_twiss_summary".\
(Default: false)

a string in [`RANGE`](#sec:range) format that specifies a segment of beam-line for the `PTC_TWISS` calculation.\
(Default: $`\#S/\#E`$)

a logical flag to trigger the reading of the transfer map from table named "map_table" created by a preceding `PTC_TWISS` or `PTC_NORMAL` command. The table can be also read before hand from files using a [`READTABLE`](#sec:readtable) command.\
(Default: false)

a logical flag to trigger the use of the input variables `RE11, …,RE66` as the transfer matrix.\
(Default: false)

values of the $`6\times 6`$ transfer matrix.\
(Default: $`6\times 6`$ unit matrix)

a logical flag to trigger the use of an input map stored beforehand in file "fort.18", e.g. by a previous initial run of [`PTC_NORMAL`](#chap:ptc-normal)).\
(Default: false)

a logical flag to ignore the orbit in the map and use the closed orbit instead if requested, or the orbit defined by the starting point specified with `X, PX, Y, P, T, DT` parameters otherwise.\
(Default: false)

the name of a `BETA0` block containing the Twiss parameters to be used as input. When `ICASE=6` or `ICASE=56`, this information must be complemented by supplying a value for `BETZ` on the `PTC_TWISS` command line.\
(Default: beta0)

a logical flag to save the one-turn-map to table "map_table". The one-turn-map can then be used as starting condition for a subsequent `PTC_TWISS`, see `INITIAL_MATRIX_TABLE` parameter above.\
(Default: false)

:\
Edwards and Teng [Twiss and dispersion](#chap:twiss) parameters: $`\beta_{x,y,z}`$, $`\alpha_{x,y,z}`$, $`\mu_{x,y}`$, $`D_{x,y}`$, $`D_{px,py}`$.\
(Default: 0)

a logical flag to force computation of ring parameters ($`\gamma_{tr}`$, $`\alpha_c`$, etc.).\
(Default: false)

the [canonical](#subsec:tables-canon) coordinates of the initial orbit.\
(Default: 0.0)\

a logical flag that triggers saving of the normal form analysis results (the closed solution) into dedicated table called `NONLIN`. It is the same as `ptc_normal`. However, the nonlin table has format such that its coefficients can be accessed within the MADX script using `table` command. This permits, for example, to perform matching of these parameters or or value extraction to a variable. Also, all available orders are calculated and no `select_ptc_normal` is required. Currently the following parameters are calculated: tunes (and all their derivatives), dipsersions (and all their derivatives), eigen values, transfer map, resonance driving terms (generating function) and the pseudo Hamiltonian. If radiation and envelope is switched on with [`PTC_SETSWITCH`](#sec:ptc-setswitch) then damping decrements, equilibrium emittances and beam sizes are calculated. Attention: the results are always the plain polynomial coefficients, which is different from `ptc_normal` nomenclature for some variables, which in turn always gives values of the partial derivatives. Therefore, in order to obtain values of the partial derivatives the respective factorials and binomial coefficients need to be factored out by the user. Also, if TIME=true the chromatic variables are NOT transformed into usual $`\Delta p/p_0`$ dependence and in this case they are related to $`\Delta E/p_0 c`$. For example, dispersions and chormaticities will be different by relativistic beta factor. Similarly, the T coordinate is time times the speed of light instead of path length times the speed of light.

a logical flag that triggers tracking of Resonance Driving Terms (RDTs). For each element all RDTs from order 3 up to value defined by switch `NO` are saved in `TWISSRDT` table. This table contains also auxiliary columns as s position, element names, strengths and lengths such that RDT values can be plotted the same way as values from `TWISS` table. RDTs are elements of the generating function (GFN) of the normalization transformation and for compatibility with `PTC_NORMAL` notation the columns are prefixed with GNF. Because they are complex numbers 3 values are saved: real part (GNFC), imaginary part (GNFS) and amplitude (GNFA). For example, RDT $`f_{300000}`$ will be saved in columns `GNFC_3_0_0_0_0_0`, `GNFS_3_0_0_0_0_0` and `GNFA_3_0_0_0_0_0`. Currently the indexes can be only single digit numbers. If amplitude of an RDT is smaller than 1e-12, it is saved as zero. RDTs that have zero amplitude for all elements are not saved in the table.

### Periodic Solution

This is the simplest form of the `PTC_TWISS` command, which computes the periodic solution for a specified beam line. It may accept all basic attributes described in [`PTC_TWISS`](#sec:ptc-twiss) above.

> 

### Evaluation of Twiss parameters inside magnets

This computes the periodic solution for a specified beam line and evaluates the Twiss parameters at each thin-slice (a.k.a "integration-node") inside magnets. The number of such integration-nodes is given by the number of steps (`NST`) selected when creating the `PTC` layout. All other basic attributes described in [`PTC_TWISS`](#sec:ptc-twiss) above may be selected.

> 

**Example:**\
An example is found in the [`PTC_TWISS` Examples](http://madx.web.cern.ch/madx/madX/examples/ptc_twiss/SliceMagnets/) repository.

### Solution with Initial Conditions

Initial conditions can be supplied in different ways. Naturally only one of the methods below can be used at a time, and they can not be mixed. In this mode it is assumed that the lattice is a line and no ring parameters are evaluated (their values are set to -1000000), unless `RING_PARAMETERS=true`, which forces computation of closed solution for the resulting map. If a closed solution does not exist, `PTC` reports an error and exits.

The following logic is programmed in `PTC` to identify the source of initial conditions:

> 

#### Initial Values from the Given Twiss Parameters

`PTC_TWISS` calculates a solution with initial conditions given by the Twiss parameters, which are explicitly typed as attributes to the command. This case is also limited to uncoupled motion of the preceding ring or beam-line.

> 

**Example:**\
An example is found in the [`PTC_TWISS` Examples](http://madx.web.cern.ch/madx/madX/examples/ptc_twiss/) in the folder ["Example2"](http://madx.web.cern.ch/madx/madX/examples/ptc_twiss/Example2).

#### Initial Values from a Map-Table

`PTC_TWISS` calculates a solution with initial conditions given as a map-table of preceding ring or beam-line. It requires the input option `INITIAL_MATRIX_TABLE` and an existing map-table in memory, as generated by a preceding [`PTC_NORMAL`](#sec:ptc-normal) command.

> 

**Example:**\
An example is found in the [`PTC_TWISS` Examples](http://madx.web.cern.ch/madx/madX/examples/ptc_twiss/) in the folder ["Example3"](http://madx.web.cern.ch/madx/madX/examples/ptc_twiss/Example3).

#### Initial Values from a Map-File

`PTC_TWISS` calculates a solution with initial conditions given as a map-file (fort.18) obtained from a preceding ring or beam-line. It requires the input option `INITIAL_MAP_MANUAL` and an existing map-file in file "fort.18", as generated by a preceding [`PTC_NORMAL`](#sec:ptc-normal) command.

> 

**Example:**\
An example is found in the [`PTC_TWISS` Examples](http://madx.web.cern.ch/madx/madX/examples/ptc_twiss/) in the folder ["Example3"](http://madx.web.cern.ch/madx/madX/examples/ptc_twiss/Example3).

#### Initial Values from a Given Matrix

`PTC_TWISS` calculates a solution with initial conditions given by a matrix explicitly given as attribute to the command. It requires the option `INITIAL_MATRIX_MANUAL`. `MAD-X` expects a symplectic 6x6 transfer matrix as input.

> 

**Example:**\
An example is found in the [`PTC_TWISS` Examples](http://madx.web.cern.ch/madx/madX/examples/ptc_twiss/) in the folder ["Example4"](http://madx.web.cern.ch/madx/madX/examples/ptc_twiss/Example4).

#### Initial Values from Twiss Parameters via BETA0-block

`PTC_TWISS` calculates a solution with initial conditions given by Twiss parameters, which are transferred from the `BETA0` block. The data in the the `BETA0` block have to be filled by a combination of the [`SAVEBETA`](#sec:savebeta) and [`TWISS`](#chap:twiss) commands of `MAD-X` for a preceding ring or beam-line. This case is limited to uncoupled motion of the preceding machine.

> 

**Example:**\
An example is found in the [`PTC_TWISS` Examples](http://madx.web.cern.ch/madx/madX/examples/ptc_twiss/) in the folder ["Example1"](http://madx.web.cern.ch/madx/madX/examples/ptc_twiss/Example1).
