# `PTC` Commands
## Non-Linear Machine Parameters

The `PTC_NORMAL` module ( and ) of `MAD-X` is based on `PTC` code. This module takes full advantage of the `PTC` Normal Form analysis which is a considerable upgrade of what was available with the Lie Algebra technique used in `MAD-8`. It allows to calculate dispersions, chromaticities, anharmonicities and Hamiltonian terms to very high order. In fact, the order is only limited by the available computer memory and computing time.

The number of terms per order increases with some power law. The internal `MAD-X` tables are not adequate to keep such large amounts of data. On the other hand, only a reduced set of this data is actually needed by the user. Thus a much easier and flexible solution is to gather user requirements with a series of `SELECT_PTC_NORMAL` command. A special `MAD-X` table is dynamically built using those commands and is filled by a subsequent call to `PTC_NORMAL`.

Another essential advantage of this table is that it is structured to facilitate exchange of Normal Form (including Hamiltonian terms of high order) between `MAD-X` modules. The immediate goal is to use this table to allow non-linear matching inside the present `MAD-X`[`MATCHING`](#chap:match) module.

**Synopsis:**

> 

### SELECT_PTC_NORMAL

The `SELECT_PTC_NORMAL` command selects the parameters to be calculated by a subsequent `PTC_NORMAL` command.

> 

The attributes are:

the dispersion paramaters specified as integer numbers specifying their order: $`D_x^{(n)} = \partial^{(n)} x_{co} / \partial \delta_p^{(n)}`$, $`D_{px}^{(n)} = \partial^{(n)} px_{co} / \partial \delta_p^{(n)}`$, $`D_y^{(n)} = \partial^{(n)} y_{co} / \partial \delta_p^{(n)}`$, $`D_{py}^{(n)} = \partial^{(n)} py_{co} / \partial \delta_p^{(n)}`$, where `co` is abbreviation of "closed orbit".

horizontal and vertical tune paramaters are fixed to order 0: $`Q_1^{(0)}`$, $`Q_2^{(0)}`$

the tune derivative parameters specified as integer numbers specifying their order. $`\partial^{(n)} Q_1 / \partial \delta_p^{(n)}`$, $`\partial^{(n)} Q_2 / \partial \delta_{p}^{(n)}`$

the anharmonicities, each defined by three integer numbers: the order $`n_1`$ of $`\epsilon_1`$, the order $`n_2`$ of $`\epsilon_2`$ and the order $`n_3`$ of $`\delta_p`$. $`\partial^{(n_1 + n_2 + n_3)} Q_z / (
  \partial\epsilon_1^{(n_1)} \partial\epsilon_2^{(n_2)}
  \partial\delta_p^{(n_3)})`$. For example, `ANHX=2,0,0` represents second order in $`\epsilon_1`$: $`\partial^{(2)} Q_1 / \partial \epsilon_1^{(2)}`$. And `ANHY=3,1,2` represents $`\partial^{(6)} Q_2 / (
  \partial\epsilon_1^{(3)} \partial\epsilon_2^{(1)}
  \partial\delta_p^{(2)})`$.

components of the eigenvectors at the end of the structure can be specified by two integers: the eigenvector number and the coordinate coded in the list: {$`x, p_x, y, p_y, t, p_t`$}:\
The pair $`n_1`$,$`n_2`$ defines the $`n_2`$-th component of the $`n_1`$-th eigenvector.

The Generating Function can be specified by {$`n_1`$, $`n_2`$, $`n_3`$}. The positive and negative values of $`n-1`$ define the order of upright or skew resonances respectively. The integers $`n_2`$ and $`n_3`$ are reserved for a future upgrade and must be set to 0.\
For example `GNFU=-5,0,0` calculates all Generating Function terms for skew decapoles. In the output table the cosine, sine and amplitude coefficients are denoted as "GNFC", "GNFS" and "GNFA" respectively.

the Hamiltonian terms can be specified by {$`n_1`$, $`n_2`$, $`n_3`$} The positive and negative values of $`n_1`$ define the order of upright or skew resonances, respectively. The integers $`n_2`$ and $`n_3`$ are reserved for a future upgrade and must be set to 0.\
For example, `HAML=3,0,0` calculates all Hamiltonian terms for upright sextupoles. In the output table the cosine, sine and amplitude coefficients are denoted as "HAMC", "HAMS" and "HAMA" respectively.

**Caution:** if more than one order of terms is selected only the lower one is correct because higher orders contain "cross terms" from the lower ones.

### PTC_NORMAL

The calculation of the parameters specified by the preceding `SELECT_PTC_NORMAL` commands is initiated by the `PTC_NORMAL` command, which operates on the working beam line defined in the latest [USE](#sec:use) command.

> 

The attributes are:

user-defined dimensionality of the phase-space (4, 5 or 6).\
(Default: 4)

the order of the map.\
(Default: 1)

a logical switch to turn on the closed orbit calculation.\
(Default: false)

relative momentum offset for reference closed orbit.\
(Default: 0.0)

a logical flag to activate the storage of the map-table in memory.\
`MAPTABLE=true` and `NO=1` creates the one-turn matrix which can be used by the next [`PTC_TWISS`](#chap:ptc-twiss) command.\
(Default: false)

a logical flag to activate the calculation of the Normal Form.\
(Default: false)

**Example**\
The simple example is located on the Web-page for the [`PTC_NORMAL` example](http://cern.ch/frs/mad-X_examples/ptc_normal).
