# `PTC` Commands
## `MAD-X`-`PTC` Auxiliaries

This chapter documents the interface between `MAD-X` and `PTC` and the auxiliary commands available in the `PTC` library.

**Available Commands**

- [`PTC_SETSWITCH`](#sec:ptc-setswitch)

- [`PTC_KNOB`](#sec:ptc-knob)

- [`PTC_SETKNOBVALUE`](#sec:ptc-setknobvalue)

- `MATCH_WITHPTCKNOBS` **(Under Construction)**

- [`PTC_PRINTPARAMETRIC`](#sec:ptc-printparametric)

- [`PTC_EPLACEMENT`](#sec:ptc-eplacement)

- [`PTC_PRINTFRAMES`](#sec:ptc-printframes)

- [`PTC_SELECT`](#sec:ptc-select)

- [`PTC_SELECT_MOMENT`](#sec:ptc-select-moment)

- [`PTC_MOMENTS`](#sec:ptc-moments) **(Under Construction)**

- [`PTC_DUMPMAPS`](#sec:ptc-dumpmaps)

- [`PTC_SETCAVITIES`](#sec:ptc-setcavities)

### PTC_KNOB

> 

Sets knobs in `PTC` calculations. This is currently valid only in `PTC_TWISS`; `PTC_NORMAL` will follow.

Knobs appear as additional parameters of the phase space. Twiss functions are then obtained as functions of these additional parameters (Taylor series). Map elements may also be stored as functions of knobs. The [`PTC_SELECT`](#sec:ptc-select) command description shows how to request a given element to be stored as a Taylor series.

The parametric results can also be:

1.  written to a file with [`PTC_PRINTPARAMETRIC`](#sec:ptc-printparametric).

2.  plotted and studied using rviewer command ([`RPLOT`](#sec:rplot) plugin).

3.  used to rapidly obtain approximate values of lattice functions for given values of knobs ([`PTC_SETKNOBVALUE`](#sec:ptc-setknobvalue)). This feature is the foundation of a fast matching algorithm with `PTC`.

Command parameters and switches:

a string in range format (Default: NULL)\
Specifies name of the element containing the knob(s) to be set.

list of integers (Default: ???)\
Defines which order

(Default: .true.)\
Normally a knob is a property of a single element in a layout. The specified name must match 1:1 to an element name. This is the case when exactmatch is true.\
Knobs might be also set to all family of elements. In such case the exactmatch switch must be false. A given order field component of all the elements that name starts with the name specified by the user become a single knob.

???

**Example**\
[dog leg chicane](http://cern.ch/frs/mad-X_examples/ptc_madx_interface/knobs/knobs.madx): Dipolar components of both rbends and dipolar and quadrupolar components of the focusing quads set as knobs. Some first and second order map coefficients set to be stored as parametric results. ptc_twiss command is performed and the parametric results are written to files in two formats.

[dog leg chicane](http://cern.ch/frs/mad-X_examples/ptc_madx_interface/matchknobs/matchknobs.madx): Knob values are matched to get requested lattice functions.

### PTC_SETKNOBVALUE

The `PTC_SETKNOBVALUE` command sets a given knob value.

> 

All values in the twiss table used by the last `PTC_TWISS` command and the columns specified with [`PTC_SELECT, PARAMETRIC=true;`](#sec:ptc-select) are reevaluated using the buffered parametric results.

The parameters of the command basically contain the fields that allow to identify uniquely the knob and the value to be set.

Command parameters and switches:

a string in range format that specifies the name of the element containing the knob to be set.\
(Default: none)

are lists of integers that define the knob.\
(Default: -1)

specifies the value to which the knob is to be set.\
(Default: 0)

**Example:**\
[dog leg chicane](http://cern.ch/frs/mad-X_examples/ptc_madx_interface/matchknobs/matchknobs.madx): strength of dipole field component in quadrupoles is matched to obtain the required R56 value.

### PTC_VARYKNOBS (Under Construction)

The `PTC_VARYKNOBS` command allows matching with `PTC` knobs.

> 

where the attributes are

defines the range over which the expansion is trusted\
(Default: 0.1)

This matching procedure takes advantage of the parametric results that are accessible with `PTC`. Namely, parameters occurring in the matching constrains are obtained as functions (polynomials) of the matching variables. In other words, each variable is a knob in `PTC` calculation. Evaluation of the polynomials is relatively fast comparing to the regular `PTC` calculation which makes finding the minimum with the parametrized constraints very fast.

However, the algorithm is not faster in a general case:

1.  The calculation time dramatically increases with the number of parameters and at some point penalty rising from this overcomes the gain we get from the fast polynomial evaluation.

2.  A parametric result is an approximation that is valid only around the nominal parameter values.

The algorithm is described below.\

    MATCH, use_ptcknobs=true;
    ...
    PTC_VARYKNOB:
      initial = [s, none] ,
      element = [s, none] ,
      kn    = [i, -1],
      ks    = [i, -1],
      exactmatch = [l, true, true],
      trustrange    = [r, 0.1],
      step     = [r, 0.0],
      lower    = [r, -1.e20],
      upper    = [r,  1.e20];
    ...
    END_MATCH;

For user convenience the limits are specified in the `MAD-X` units (k1,k2, etc). This also applies to dipolar field where the user must specify limits of `K0 = angle/path_length`. This guarantees consistency in treatment of normal and skew dipole components.

**Important:** Note that inside the code skew magnets are represented only by normal component and tilt, so the nominal skew component is always zero. Inside `PTC` tilt can not become a knob, while skew component can. Remember about this fact when setting the limits of skew components in the matching. When the final results are exported back to `MAD-X`, they are converted back to the "normal" state, so the nominal skew component is zero and tilt and normal component are modified accordingly.

**Example**\
[dog leg chicane](http://cern.ch/frs/mad-X_examples/ptc_madx_interface/matchknobs/.madx).

**Algorithm**\

1.  Buffer the key commands (`ptc_varyknob`, `constraint`, `ptc_setswitch`, `ptc_twiss`, `ptc_normal`, etc) appearing between `match, useptcknobs=true;` and any of matching actions calls (migrad, lmdif, jacobian, etc)

2.  When matching action appears,

    1.  set "The Current Variables Values" (TCVV) to zero

    2.  perform THE LOOP, i.e. points 3-17

3.  Prepare PTC environment (ptc_createuniverse, ptc_createlayout)

4.  Set the user defined knobs (with ptc_knob).

5.  Set TCVV using ptc_setfieldcomp command.

6.  Run a PTC command (twiss or normal).

7.  Run a runtime created script that performs a standard matching; all the user defined knobs are variables of this matching.

8.  Evaluate constraints expressions to get the matching function vector (I).

9.  Add the matched values to TCVV.

10. End PTC session (run ptc_end).

11. If the matched values are not close enough to zeroes then goto 3.

12. Prepare PTC environment (ptc_createuniverse, ptc_createlayout).

13. Set TCVV using ptc_setfieldcomp command.\
    ( — please note that knobs are not set in this case – )

14. Run a PTC command (twiss or normal).

15. Evaluate constraints expressions to get the matching function vector (II).

16. Evaluate a penalty function that compares matching function vectors (I) and (II).\
    See points 7 and 14.

17. If the matching function vectors are not similar to each other within requested precision then goto 3.

18. Print TCVV, which are the matched values.

### PTC_PRINTPARAMETRIC

Prints parametric results obtained with `PTC_TWISS` after defining paramteters (knobs) with `PTC_KNOB` command (see\
textttPTC\
\_KNOB). The resulting optical functions are represented as polynomials of the knobs.

> 

Command parameters and switches:

output file format. Valid entries are ’tex’ and ’txt’.

the name of the output file.

### PTC_EPLACEMENT

Places a given element at required position and orientation. All rotations are made around the front face of the element.

> 

Command parameters and switches:

a string in range format that specifies the name of the element to be moved.\

defines the coordinate system with respect to which coordinates and angles are specified.\
Possible values are:

global coordinate system (Default)

current position

end face of the previous element

shifs of the front face of the magnet.\
(Default: 0.0)

pitch angle, rotation around x axis.\
(Default: 0.0)

yaw angle, rotation around y axis.\
(Default: 0.0)

roll angle, rotation around s axis.\
(Default: 0.0)

a flag to perform only translation changes, and orientation of element is left unchanged.\
(Default: false)

a flag to perform only rotation changes and position of element is left unchanged.\
(Default: false)

a logical flag: if true all elements downstream are placed at default positions with respect to the moved element; if false the rest of the layout stays untouched.\
(Default: true)

a logical flag used essentially for debugging. If true, an internal survey of the entire line is performed after element placement at new position and orientation.\
(Default: true)

**Example**\
[Dog leg chicane](http://cern.ch/frs/mad-X_examples/ptc_madx_interface/eplacement/chicane.madx): position of quadrupoles is matched to obtain required `R566` value.

### PTC_PRINTFRAMES

Print the `PTC` geometry of a layout to a specified file.

> 

Command parameters and switches:

specifies the name of the file.

specifies the format of geometry data. Currently two formats are accepted:

prints a simple text file. (Default)

creates [ROOT](http://root.cern.ch) macro that can be used to produce a 3D display of the geometry.

**Example**\
[Dog leg chicane](http://cern.ch/frs/mad-X_examples/ptc_madx_interface/eplacement/eplacement.madx) with some elements displaced with help of `PTC_EPLACEMENT`.

### PTC_SELECT

Selects a map element to be stored in a user-defined table, or stored as a function (Taylor series) of a defined [knob](#sec:ptc-knob). Both cases can be joined in a single `PTC_SELECT` command.

> 

Command parameters and switches:

the name of the table where values should be stored.

the name of the column in the table where values should be stored.

specifies the row of the map.

a string composed of digits that defines the monomials of the polynomial in `PTC` nomenclature. The length of the string should be equal to the number of variables and each digit corresponds to the exponent of the corresponding variable. Monomial `’ijklmn’` defines $`x^i {p_x}^j y^k {p_y}^l \Delta T^m
   (\Delta p/p)^n`$.

For example, element=2 and monomial=1000000 defines coefficient of the second polynomial (that defines $`p_x`$) close to $`x`$, in other words it is R21.

a logical switch. If true, and if any [knobs](#sec:ptc-knob) is defined, the map element is stored as the parametric result.\
(Default: false)

??? is that the element referred above ??

To store map elements in a user-defined table and column, the table with the named columns should pre-exist the `PTC_SELECT` command.

To store map elements as a function of a defined knob, the `PARAMETRIC` attribute must be set to `true`.

**Examples**\
[dog leg chicane](http://cern.ch/frs/mad-X_examples/ptc_madx_interface/ptc_secordmatch/chicane.madx): strength of quads is matched to obtain required T112 value.

[dog leg chicane](http://cern.ch/frs/mad-X_examples/ptc_madx_interface/eplacement/chicane.madx): position of quads is matched to obtain required T566 value.

[dog leg chicane](http://cern.ch/frs/mad-X_examples/ptc_madx_interface/matchwithknobs/matchwithknobs.madx): dipole and quadrupole strengths are matched with the help of knobs to obtain required momentum compaction and Twiss functions.

### PTC_SELECT_MOMENT

Selects a moment to be stored in a user-defined table, or stored as a function (Taylor series) of a defined knob. Both cases can be joined in one command.

> 

Command parameters and switches:

a list of coma separated strings, each composed of up to 6 digits defining the moment of a polynomial in `PTC` nomenclature:\
the string `’ijklmn’`, where i,j,k,l,m,n are digits from 0 to 9, defines the moment $`<x^i {p_x}^j y^k {p_y}^l \Delta T^m
  (\Delta p/p)^n>`$.

For example, `MOMENT_S=100000` defines $`<x^1>`$

Note that for input we always use `MAD-X` notation where dp/p is always the 6th coordinate. Internally to `PTC`, dp/p is the 5th coordinate. We perform automatic conversion that is transparent for the user. As the consequence RMS in dp/p is always denoted as the string `’000002’`, even in 5D case.

This notation allows to define more then one moment with a single command. In this case, the corresponding column names are built from the string arguments to `MOMENT_S` with a `mu` prefix. However, they are always extended to 6 digits, i.e. trailing 0’s are automatically added.

For example, with `MOMENT_S=2`, defines $`<x^2>`$ and the corresponding column name is `mu200000`.

This method does not allow to pass bigger numbers larger than 9. In order to define such a moment, see the attribute `MOMENT` below.

a list of up to 6 coma separated integers that define the moment:\
$`<x^i {p_x}^j y^k {p_y}^l \Delta T^m (\Delta p/p)^n>`$ being defined as `MOMENT=i,j,k,l,m,n`\
(Default: 0)

For example: `MOMENT=2` defines $`< x^2 >`$, `MOMENT=0,0,2` defines $`< y^2 >`$, `MOMENT=0,14,0,2` defines $`<{p_x}^{14} {p_y}^2>`$, etc.

defines the name of the column where values should be stored. If not specified then it is automatically generated from the `MOMENT` definition:\
$`< x^i {p_x}^j y^k {p_y}^l \Delta T^m (\Delta p/p)^n>`$ =$`>`$ `mu_i_j_k_l_m_n`\
(where numbers are separated with underscores).\
This attribute is ignored if `MOMENT_S` is specified.\
(Default: none)

specifies the name of the table where the calculated moments are stored.\
(Default: moments)

a logical flag to to store the element as a parametric result if a [knob](#sec:ptc-knob) has been defined.\
(Default: false)

To store a moment in a user-defined table and column, the table with the named columns should pre-exist the `PTC_SELECT_MOMENT` command.

To store a moment as a function of a defined knob, the `PARAMETRIC` attribute must be set to `true`.

**Examples**\
from [ATF2](http://cern.ch/frs/mad-X_examples/ptc_madx_interface/moments/moments.madx):

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> !Here is sigmax\*\*2\
> xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx̄xxxxxxxxx̄ ptc_select_moment, table = momord2, moment_s=;\
> \
> !Below are example how to encode other moments\
> ptc_select_moment, table = momord2, moment_s=,11,02,002,0011,0002,00002;\
> ptc_select_moment, table = momord2xy, moment_s=,0110,1001,0101,10001,\
> ,00101,00011;\
> ptc_select_moment, table = momord4, moment_s=,22,04, 004,0022,0004;\
> ptc_select_moment, table = momord6, moment_s=;
>
> </div>

### PTC_MOMENTS

The command `PTC_MOMENTS` calculates the moments previously selected with the [`PTC_SELECT_MOMENT`](#sec:ptc-select-moment) command. It uses maps saved by the [`PTC_TWISS`](#sec:ptc-twiss) command, hence, the `SAVEMAPS` switch of `PTC_TWISS` must be set to `true` (Default) to be able to calculate moments.

> 

The command parameters and switches are

order of the calculation, maximally twice the order of the last twiss.\
(Default: 1)

define the distribution in x, y and z dimension respectively and can take one of the following values:

Gaussian distribution (Default)

flat distribution in the first of variables (dp over p) of a given dimension and Delta Dirac in the second one (T)

flat rectangular distribution

**Examples**\
[ATF2](http://cern.ch/frs/mad-X_examples/ptc_madx_interface/moments/moments.madx)

### PTC_DUMPMAPS

`PTC_DUMPMAPS` dumps the linear part of the map for each element of the layout into the specified file.

> 

The only command parameter is:

the filename of the file to which the matrices are dumped.\
(Default: ptcmaps)

### PTC_SETCAVITIES

The `PTC_SETCAVITIES` command adjusts cavities and sets appropriate reference momenta for a layout containing travelling wave cavities.

> 

The main goal is to update the reference beam energy for the elements that follow a travelling wave cavity. `PTC` traces the synchronous particle, that is the particle that has all its parameters set to zero at the beginning of the layout under study.

When `PTC` reaches a cavity in the layout, the parameters of the cavity may be adjusted according to the user-defined `MAXACCEL` switch previously set in [`PTC_SETSWITCH`](#sec:ptc-setswitch).

If `MAXACCEL=true` the phase of the cavity is adjusted so it gives the maximum acceleration. The phase lag is then added to this adjusted phase.

If `MAXACCEL=false` the cavity parameters are left unchanged.

The synchronous particle is then tracked through the travelling wave cavity and the energy gain is calculated. This energy becomes the new reference energy for all elements downstream of the cavity.

This process is repeated at every cavity encountered further in the tracking trough the layout.

Parameters of the cavities are printed to a file named "twcavsettings.txt".

**Attention:**\
in `PTC` the phase velocity of a cavity wave is always equal to the speed of light. Hence, if `PTC` internal state `TIME` is `true`, which is the most correct setting, the voltage seen by a particle is varying along the structure. If `TIME=false`, the tracked particle is assumed to propagate at the speed of light ($`v=c`$) and the particle moves synchronously with the wave front.

**Attention:**\
For programming reasons, any element that changes the reference momentum, i.e. travelling wave cavities, must be followed by a marker. If a marker does not follow immediately each of these elements, `PTC` detects an error and stops the program. Hence two cavities cannot be placed one immediately after the other and a marker must be inserted in between.
