# Control
## Conventions

### Reference System

The accelerator and/or beam line to be studied is described as a sequence of beam elements placed sequentially along a reference orbit. The reference orbit is the path of a charged particle having the central design momentum of the accelerator through idealised magnets with no fringe fields (see Figure <a href="#F-REF" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="F-REF">1.1</a>).

<figure id="F-REF" data-latex-placement="htb">
<embed src="figures/f-ref.pdf" />
<figcaption>Local Reference System</figcaption>
</figure>

The reference orbit consists of a series of straight line segments and circular arcs. It is defined under the assumption that all elements are perfectly aligned. The accompanying tripod of the reference orbit spans a local curvilinear right handed coordinate system *(x,y,s)* The local *s*-axis is the tangent to the reference orbit. The two other axes are perpendicular to the reference orbit and are labelled *x* (in the bend plane) and *y* (perpendicular to the bend plane).

### Closed Orbit

Due to various errors like misalignment errors, field errors, fringe fields etc., the closed orbit does not coincide with the reference orbit. The closed orbit also changes with the momentum error. The closed orbit is described with respect to the reference orbit, using the local reference system (*x, y, s*). It is evaluated including any nonlinear effects.

`MAD-X` also computes the betatron and synchrotron oscillations with respect to the closed orbit. Results are given in the local (*x, y, s*)-system defined by the reference orbit.

### Global Reference System

The global reference orbit of the accelerator is uniquely defined by the sequence of physical elements. The local reference system (*x, y, s*) may thus be referred to a global Cartesian coordinate system (*X, Y, Z*) (see Figure <a href="#F-GLOB" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="F-GLOB">1.2</a>).

The positions between beam elements are indexed with $`i=0,\ldots n`$. The local reference system ($`x_i`$, $`y_i`$, $`s_i`$) at position *i*, i.e. the displacement and direction of the reference orbit with respect to the system (*X, Y, Z*) are defined by three displacements ($`X_i`$, $`Y_i`$, $`Z_i`$) and three angles ($`\theta_i`$, $`\phi_i`$, $`\psi_i`$)

<figure id="F-GLOB" data-latex-placement="htb">
<embed src="figures/f-glob.pdf" />
<figcaption>Global Reference System showing the global Cartesian system (<span class="math inline"><em>X</em>, <em>Y</em>, <em>Z</em></span>) in black and the local reference system (<span class="math inline"><em>x</em>, <em>y</em>, <em>s</em></span>) in red after translation (<span class="math inline"><em>X</em><sub><em>i</em></sub>, <em>Y</em><sub><em>i</em></sub>, <em>Z</em><sub><em>i</em></sub></span>) and rotation (<span class="math inline"><em>θ</em><sub><em>i</em></sub>, <em>ϕ</em><sub><em>i</em></sub>, <em>ψ</em><sub><em>i</em></sub></span>). The projections of the local reference system axes onto the horizontal <span class="math inline"><em>Z</em><em>X</em></span> plane of the Cartesian system are figured with blue dashed lines. The intersections of planes <span class="math inline"><em>y</em><em>s</em></span>, <span class="math inline"><em>x</em><em>y</em></span> and <span class="math inline"><em>x</em><em>s</em></span> of the local reference system with the horizontal <span class="math inline"><em>Z</em><em>X</em></span> plane of the Cartesian system are figured in green dashed lines. </figcaption>
</figure>

The above quantities are defined more precisely as follows:

Displacement of the local origin in *X*-direction.

Displacement of the local origin in *Y*-direction.

Displacement of the local origin in *Z*-direction.

$`\theta`$ is the angle of rotation (azimuth) about the global *Y*-axis, between the global *Z*-axis and the projection of the reference orbit onto the (*Z*, *X*)-plane. A positive angle `THETA` forms a right-hand screw with the *Y*-axis.

$`\phi`$ is the elevation angle, i.e. the angle between the reference orbit and its projection onto the (*Z*, *X*)-plane. A positive angle `PHI` corresponds to increasing *Y*.\
If only horizontal bends are present, the reference orbit remains in the (*Z*, *X*)-plane and `PHI` is always zero.

$`\psi`$ is the roll angle about the local *s*-axis, i.e. the angle between the line defined by the intersection of the (*x, y*)-plane and (*Z, X*)-plane on one hand, and the local *x*-axis on the other hand. A positive angle `PSI` forms a right-hand screw with the *s*-axis.

The angles ($`\theta`$, $`\phi`$, $`\psi`$) are **not** the Euler angles. The reference orbit starts at the origin and points by default in the direction of the positive *Z*-axis. The initial local axes (*x*, *y*, *s*) coincide with the global axes (*X*, *Y*, *Z*) in this order. The initial values ($`X_0`$, $`Y_0`$, $`Z_0`$, $`\theta_0`$, $`\phi_0`$, $`\psi_0`$) are therefore all zero unless the user specifies different initial conditions.

Internally the displacement is described by a vector *V* and the orientation by a unitary matrix *W*. The column vectors of *W* are the unit vectors spanning the local coordinate axes in the order (*x, y, s*). *V* and *W* have the values:

``` math
\begin{equation}
V =
 \begin{pmatrix}
  X \\
  Y \\
  Z
 \end{pmatrix}
, \qquad
W=\Theta \quad \Phi \quad \Psi
\end{equation}
```
where
``` math
\begin{equation}
\Theta =
 \begin{pmatrix}
  \cos \theta  & 0 &  \sin \theta \\
  0            & 1 &  0 \\
  -\sin \theta & 0 &  \cos \theta
 \end{pmatrix}
, \quad
\Phi =
 \begin{pmatrix}
  1 & 0          &  0 \\
  0 & \cos \phi  &  \sin \phi \\
  0 & -\sin \phi &  \cos \phi
 \end{pmatrix}
, \quad
\Psi =
 \begin{pmatrix}
  \cos \psi &  -\sin \psi & 0 \\
  \sin \psi &  \cos \psi  & 0 \\
  0	    &	0	  & 1 
 \end{pmatrix}
\end{equation}
```

The reference orbit should be closed, and it should not be twisted. This means that the displacement of the local reference system must be periodic with the revolution frequency of the accelerator, while the position angles must be periodic (modulo $`2\pi`$) with the revolution frequency. If $`\psi`$ is not periodic (modulo $`2\pi`$), coupling effects are introduced. When advancing through a beam element, `MAD-X` computes $`V_i`$ and $`W_i`$ by the recurrence relations
``` math
\begin{equation}
   V_i=W_{i-1}R_i+V_{i-1},
   \qquad
   W_i=W_{i-1}S_i
\end{equation}
```
The vector $`R_i`$ is the displacement and the matrix $`S_i`$ is the rotation of the local reference system at the exit of the element *i* with respect to the entrance of the same element. The values of $`R_i`$ and $`S_i`$ are listed below for different physical element types.

### Local Reference Systems

#### Reference System for Straight Beam Elements

In straight elements the local reference system is simply translated by the length of the element along the local *s*-axis. This is true for [Drift spaces](#sec:drift), [Quadrupoles](#sec:quadrupole), [Sextupoles](#sec:sextupole), [Octupoles](#sec:octupole), [Solenoids](#sec:solenoid), [Crab cavities](#sec:crab-cavity), [RF cavities](#sec:rf-cavity), [Electrostatic separators](#sec:separator), [Closed orbit correctors](#sec:kicker) and [Beam position monitors](#sec:monitor).

The corresponding *R*, *S* are
``` math
\begin{equation}
R =
 \begin{pmatrix}
  0 \\
  0 \\
  L
 \end{pmatrix}
, \quad
S =
 \begin{pmatrix}
  1 & 0 &  0 \\
  0 & 1 &  0 \\
  0 & 0 &  1
 \end{pmatrix}
.
\end{equation}
```
A rotation of the element about the *S*-axis has no effect on *R* and *S*, since the rotations of the reference system before and after the element cancel.

<figure id="F-DRF" data-latex-placement="ht">
<embed src="figures/f-drf.pdf" />
<figcaption>Reference System for Straight Beam Elements</figcaption>
</figure>

#### Reference System for Bending Magnets

[Bending magnets](#sec:bend) have a curved reference orbit. For both rectangular and sector bending magnets, the *R* and *S* are expressed as function the bend angle $`\alpha`$:
``` math
\begin{equation}
R =
 \begin{pmatrix}
  \rho\,(\cos \alpha - 1) \\
  0 \\
  \rho\,\sin \alpha
 \end{pmatrix}
, \quad
S =
 \begin{pmatrix}
  \cos \alpha & 0 &  -\sin \alpha \\
  0 & 1 &  0 \\
  \sin \alpha & 0 &  \cos \alpha
 \end{pmatrix}
\end{equation}
```

A positive bend angle represents a bend to the right, i.e. towards negative *x* values. For sector bending magnets, the bend radius is given by $`\rho`$, and for rectangular bending magnets it has the value $`\rho = L / (2 \sin(\alpha/2))`$. If the magnet is rotated about the *s*-axis by an angle $`\psi`$, *R* and *S* are transformed by
``` math
\begin{equation}
   \overline{R}=TR,
   \qquad
   \overline{S}=TST^{-1}
\end{equation}
```
where *T* is the orthogonal rotation matrix
``` math
\begin{equation}
T =
 \begin{pmatrix}
  \cos \psi &  -\sin \psi & 0 \\
  \sin \psi &  \cos \psi  & 0 \\
  0	    &	0	  & 1 
 \end{pmatrix}
\end{equation}
```
The special value $`\psi = \pi/2`$ represents a bend down.

<figure id="F-RBND" data-latex-placement="htb">
<embed src="figures/f-rbnd.pdf" />
<figcaption>Reference System for a Rectangular Bending Magnet; the signs of pole-face rotations are positive as shown.</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure id="F-SBND" data-latex-placement="htb">
<embed src="figures/f-sbnd.pdf" />
<figcaption>Reference System for a Sector Bending Magnet; the signs of pole-face rotations are positive as shown.</figcaption>
</figure>

### Sign Conventions for Magnetic Fields

The `MAD-X` program uses the following Taylor expansion for the field on the mid-plane $`y=0`$, described in (Note the factorial in the denominator):
``` math
\begin{equation}
B_y(x,0)=\sum_{n=0}^{\infty} \frac{B_n\,x^n}{n!}
\end{equation}
```

The field coefficients have the following meaning:

Dipole field, with a positive value in the positive $`y`$ direction; a positive field bends a positively charged particle to the right.

Quadrupole coefficient $`B_1 = ( \partial B_y / \partial x )`$; a positive value corresponds to horizontal focussing of a positively charged particle.

Sextupole coefficient $`B_2 =  ( \partial^2 B_y / \partial x^2 )`$.

Octupole coefficient $`B_3 =  ( \partial^3 B_y / \partial x^3 )`$.

etc.

Using this expansion and the curvature *h* of the reference orbit, the longitudinal component of the vector potential to order 4 is:
``` math
\begin{equation}
  \begin{aligned}
    A_s = &+ B_0\,\Big(x-\frac{hx^2}{2(1+hx)}\Big) \\
    &+ B_1\,\Big(\frac{1}{2}(x^2-y^2) - \frac{h}{6}x^3 + \frac{h^2}{24}(4x^4-y^4)+\cdots\Big) \\
    &+ B_2\,\Big(\frac{1}{6}(x^3-3xy^2) - \frac{h}{24}(x^4-y^4)+\cdots\Big) \\
    &+ B_3\,\Big(\frac{1}{24}(x^4-6x^2y^2+y^4) \cdots \Big) \\
    &+\cdots
  \end{aligned}
\end{equation}
```
Taking $`\vec{B} = \nabla \times \vec{A}`$ in curvilinear coordinates, the field components can be computed as
``` math
\begin{equation}
\label{eq:field-components}
  \begin{aligned}
B_x(x,y) = &+ B_1\,\Big(y+\frac{h^2}{6}y^3+\cdots\Big) \\
           &+ B_2\,\Big(xy - \frac{h}{6}y^3+\cdots \Big) \\
           &+ B_3\,\Big(\frac{1}{6}(3x^2y-y^3)+ \cdots \Big)\\
           &+\cdots\\
& \\
B_y(x,y)=  &+ B_0   \\
           &+ B_1\,\Big(x-\frac{h}{2}y^2+\frac{h^2}{2}xy^2+\cdots \Big)\\
           &+ B_2\,\Big(\frac{1}{2}(x^2-y^2)-\frac{h}{2}xy^2+\cdots \Big)\\
           &+ B_3\,\Big(\frac{1}{6}(x^3-3xy^2)+ \cdots \Big)\\
           &+\cdots
  \end{aligned}
\end{equation}
```

It can be easily verified that both $`\nabla \times \vec{B}`$ and $`\nabla . \vec{B}`$ are zero to the order of the $`B_3`$ term.

Introducing the magnetic rigidity $`B \rho = p_s / q`$ as the momentum of the particle divided by its charge, the multipole coefficients are computed as
``` math
\begin{equation}
\label{eq:kn}
K_n = q B_n / p_s  =  B_n / B \rho
\end{equation}
```

### Generalisation to normal and skew components

The previous section assumed an expansion at the mid-plane ($`y=0`$), symmetry around the mid-plane and considered only the vertical component of the field.

An extension using complex notation for the position ($`x + i y`$) and the field is given as

``` math
\begin{equation}
B_y +  i B_x =\sum_{n=0}^{\infty} (b_n\,+ia_n) \frac{(x+iy)^n}{n^{n-1}}
\end{equation}
```

By introducing the normal and skew multipole coefficients $`KN`$ and $`KS`$ at order $`n`$ as
``` math
\begin{equation}
\label{eq:knn}
KN_n = q\,b_n / p_s  =  b_n / B \rho
\end{equation}
```
and
``` math
\begin{equation}
\label{eq:kns}
KS_n = q\,a_n / p_s  =  a_n / B \rho
\end{equation}
```
the kicks received in each plane can be expressed as the summation over all components
``` math
\begin{equation}
\Delta P_x - i \Delta P_y = \sum_{n=0}^{\infty} -(KN_n + i KS_n) \frac{(x+iy)^n}{n!}
\end{equation}
```

**Remark:** need to add references to the $`(a_n,b_n)`$ field conventions in the magnet world.

### Variables

For each variable listed in this section, the physical units are given between square brackets, where \[1\] denotes a dimensionless variable.

#### Canonical Variables Describing Orbits

`MAD-X` uses the following canonical variables to describe the motion of particles:

Horizontal position $`x`$ of the (closed) orbit, referred to the ideal orbit \[m\].

Horizontal canonical momentum $`p_x`$ of the (closed) orbit referred to the ideal orbit, divided by the reference momentum: $`\textrm{PX} = p_x / p_0`$, .

Vertical position $`y`$ of the (closed) orbit, referred to the ideal orbit \[m\].

Vertical canonical momentum $`p_y`$ of the (closed) orbit referred to the ideal orbit, divided by the reference momentum: $`\textrm{PY} = p_y / p_0`$, .

Velocity of light times the negative time difference with respect to the reference particle: $`\textrm{T} =  -  c\Delta t`$, \[m\]. A positive T means that the particle arrives ahead of the reference particle.

Energy error, divided by the reference momentum times the velocity of light: $`\textrm{PT} = \Delta E / p_s c`$ where $`p_s = p_0 (1+`$DELTAP), . This value is only non-zero when synchrotron motion is present. It describes the deviation of the particle from the orbit of a particle with the momentum error DELTAP.

**Difference between the reference momentum and the design momentum, divided by the design momentum: DELTAP = $`\Delta p / p_0`$, .** This quantity is used to [normalize](#chap:differences) all element strengths.

The independent variable is:

Arc length *s* along the reference orbit, \[m\].

In the limit of fully relativistic particles ($`\gamma \gg 1`$, $`v = c`$, $`p c = E`$), the variables T and PT used here agree with the longitudinal variables used in . This means that T becomes the negative path length difference, while PT becomes the fractional momentum error. The reference momentum $`p_s`$ must be constant in order to keep the system canonical.

#### Normalised Variables and other Derived Quantities

The normalised horizontal displacement, \[sqrt(m)\]\
$`x_n = Re ( E_1^T \, S\, Z )`$

The normalised horizontal transverse momentum, \[sqrt(m)\]\
$`p_{xn} = Im ( E_1^T\, S\, Z )`$

The horizontal Courant-Snyder invariant, \[m\]\
WX = $`x_n^2 + p_{xn}^2`$

The horizontal phase, \[1\]\
$`\phi_x = -\arctan ( p_{xn} / x_n ) / 2 \pi`$

The normalised vertical displacement, \[sqrt(m)\]\
$`y_n = Re ( E_2^T \,S\, Z )`$

The normalised vertical transverse momentum, \[sqrt(m)\]\
$`p_{yn} = Im ( E_2^T\, S\, Z )`$

The vertical Courant-Snyder invariant, \[m\]\
WY = $`y_n^2 + p_{yn}^2`$

The vertical phase, \[1\]\
$`\phi_y = -\arctan ( p_{yn} / y_n ) / 2 \pi`$

The normalised longitudinal displacement, \[sqrt(m)\]\
$`t_n = Re ( E_3^T \,S\, Z )`$

The normalised longitudinal transverse momentum, \[sqrt(m)\]\
$`p_{tn} = Im ( E_3^T\, S\, Z )`$

The longitudinal invariant, \[m\]\
WT = $`t_n^2 + p_{tn}^2`$

The longitudinal phase, \[1\]\
$`\phi_t = - \arctan ( p_{tn} / t_n ) / 2 \pi`$

In the above formulas the vectors $`E_i`$ are the three complex eigenvectors, $`Z`$ is the phase space vector, and the matrix *S* is the “symplectic unit matrix”:

``` math
\begin{equation}
Z = \left(
\begin{array}{l} x \\ p_x \\ y \\ p_y \\ t \\ p_t
\end{array} \right), \quad
S =
 \begin{pmatrix}
  0 & 1 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 \\
  -1 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 \\
  0 & 0 & 0 & 1 & 0 & 0 \\
  0 & 0 & -1 & 0 & 0 & 0 \\
  0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 1 \\
  0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & -1 & 0 \\
 \end{pmatrix}
\end{equation}
```

#### Linear Lattice Functions (Optical Functions)

Several `MAD-X` commands refer to linear lattice functions or optical functions.

Because `MAD-X` uses the canonical momenta ($`p_x`$, $`p_y`$) instead of the slopes ($`x'`$, $`y'`$), the definitions of the linear lattice functions differ slightly from those in Courant and Snyder.

Notice that in `MAD-X`, PT substitutes DELTAP as longitudinal variable. Dispersive and chromatic functions are hence derivatives with respect to PT. And since PT=BETA\*DELTAP, where BETA is the relativistic Lorentz factor, those functions given by `MAD-X` must be multiplied by BETA a number of time equal to the order of the derivative to find the functions given in the literature.

The linear lattice functions are known to `MAD-X` under the following names:

Amplitude function $`\beta_x`$, \[m\].

Correlation function $`\alpha_x = - \frac{1}{2} (\partial \beta_x / \partial s)`$, \[1\]

Phase function $`\mu_x = \int ds / \beta_x`$, \[$`2 \pi`$\]

Dispersion of $`x`$: $`D_x = (\partial x / \partial p_t)`$, \[m\]

Dispersion of $`p_x`$: $`D_{px} = (\partial p_x / \partial p_t) / p_s`$, \[1\]

Amplitude function $`\beta_y`$, \[m\]

Correlation function $`\alpha_y = - \frac{1}{2} ( \partial \beta_y / \partial s)`$, \[1\]

Phase function $`\mu_y = \int ds / \beta_y`$, \[$`2 \pi`$\]

Dispersion of $`y`$: $`D_y = (\partial y / \partial p_t)`$, \[m\]

Dispersion of $`p_y`$: $`D_{py} = ( \partial p_y / \partial p_t) / p_s`$, \[1\]

: Coupling Matrix

#### Chromatic Functions

Several `MAD-X` commands refer to the chromatic functions.

Because `MAD-X` uses the canonical momenta ($`p_x`$, $`p_y`$) instead of the slopes ($`x'`$, $`y'`$), the definitions of the chromatic functions differ slightly from those in .

Notice also that in `MAD-X`, PT substitutes DELTAP as longitudinal variable. Dispersive and chromatic functions are hence derivatives with respect to PT. Since PT=BETA/DELTAP, where BETA is the relativistic Lorentz factor, those functions given by `MAD-X` must be multiplied by BETA a number of times equal to the order of the derivative to find the functions given in the literature.

The chromatic functions are known to `MAD-X` under the following names:

Chromatic amplitude function $`W_x = \sqrt{a_x^2 + b_x^2}`$ , \[1\], where\
\_x = , a_x = -

Chromatic phase function $`\Phi_x = \arctan (a_x / b_x)`$, \[$`2 \pi`$\]

Chromatic derivative of phase function: $`DMUX = (\partial \mu_x / \partial p_t)`$, \[$`2 \pi`$\]

Chromatic derivative of dispersion $`D_x`$ : $`DDX = \frac{1}{2} (\partial^2 x / \partial p_t^2)`$, \[m\]

Chromatic derivative of dispersion $`D_{px}`$ : $`DDPX = \frac{1}{2} ( \partial^2 p_x / \partial p_t^2 ) / p_s`$, \[1\]

Chromatic amplitude function $`W_y = \sqrt{a_y^2 + b_y^2}`$ , \[1\], where\
\_y = , a_y = -

Chromatic phase function $`\Phi_y = \arctan (a_y / b_y)`$, \[$`2 \pi`$\]

Chromatic derivative of phase function: $`DMUY = (\partial \mu_y / \partial p_t)`$, \[$`2 \pi`$\]

Chromatic derivative of dispersion $`D_y`$ : $`DDY = \frac{1}{2} (\partial^2 y / \partial p_t^2)`$, \[m\]

Chromatic derivative of dispersion $`D_{py}`$ : $`DDPY = \frac{1}{2} ( \partial^2 p_y / \partial p_t^2 ) / p_s`$, \[1\]

#### Variables in the SUMM Table

After a successful TWISS command a summary table, with name SUMM, is created which contains the following variables:

The length of the machine, \[m\].

The (ORBIT5 = $`-`$T $`= c \Delta t`$, \[m\]) component of the closed orbit.

The momentum compaction factor $`\alpha_c`$, \[1\].

The transition energy $`\gamma_{tr}`$, \[1\].

The horizontal tune $`Q_1`$ \[1\].

The horizontal chromaticity $`dq_1 = \partial Q_1 / \partial p_t`$, \[1\]

The largest horizontal $`\beta_x`$, \[m\].

The maximum of the absolute horizontal dispersion $`D_x`$, \[m\].

The r.m.s. of the horizontal dispersion $`D_x`$, \[m\].

The maximum of the absolute horizontal closed orbit deviation \[m\].

The r.m.s. of the horizontal closed orbit deviation \[m\].

The vertical tune $`Q_2`$ \[1\].

The vertical chromaticity $`dq_2 = \partial Q_2 / \partial p_t`$, \[1\]

The largest vertical $`\beta_y`$, \[m\].

The maximum of the absolute vertical dispersion $`D_y`$, \[m\].

The r.m.s. of the vertical dispersion $`D_y`$, \[m\].

The maximum of the absolute vertical closed orbit deviation \[m\].

The r.m.s. of the vertical closed orbit deviation \[m\].

**Momentum difference, divided by the reference momentum \[1\].\
DELTAP = $`\Delta p / p_0`$**

First synchrotron radiation integral

Second synchrotron radiation integral

Third synchrotron radiation integral

Fourth synchrotron radiation integral

Fifth synchrotron radiation integral

Notice that in `MAD-X`, PT substitutes DELTAP as longitudinal variable. Dispersive and chromatic functions are hence derivatives with respect to PT. And since PT=BETA\*DELTAP, where BETA is the relativistic Lorentz factor, those functions given by `MAD-X` must be multiplied by BETA a number of time equal to the order of the derivative to find the functions given in the literature.

#### Variables in the TRACK Table

The command RUN writes tables with the following variables:

Horizontal position $`x`$ of the orbit, referred to the ideal orbit \[m\].

Horizontal canonical momentum $`p_x`$ of the orbit referred to the ideal orbit, divided by the reference momentum.

Vertical position $`y`$ of the orbit, referred to the ideal orbit \[m\].

Vertical canonical momentum $`p_y`$ of the orbit referred to the ideal orbit, divided by the reference momentum.

Velocity of light times the negative time difference with respect to the reference particle, $`\mathtt{T}=-c\Delta t`$, \[m\]. A positive T means that the particle arrives ahead of the reference particle.

Energy difference, divided by the reference momentum times the velocity of light, \[1\].

When tracking Lyapunov companions, the TRACK table defines the following dependent expressions:

the relative Lyapunov distance between the two particles.

the estimated Lyapunov Exponent.

the natural logarithm of the relative distance.

the natural logarithm of the turn number.

### Physical Units

`MAD-X` uses units derived from the “Système International” (SI). These units are summarised in the [Units table](#table).

| **Quantity**                    | **Unit**                |
|:--------------------------------|:------------------------|
| Length                          | m (metres)              |
| Angle                           | rad (radians)           |
| Quadrupole coefficient          | m$`^{\tt{-2}}`$         |
| Multipole coefficient, 2n poles | m$`^{\tt{-n}}`$         |
| Electric voltage                | MV (megavolts)          |
| Electric field strength         | MV/m                    |
| Frequency                       | MHz (megahertz)         |
| Phase angles                    | $`2\pi`$                |
| Particle energy                 | GeV                     |
| Particle mass                   | GeV/$`c^2`$             |
| Particle momentum               | GeV/$`c`$               |
| Beam current                    | A (ampères)             |
| Particle charge                 | e (elementary charges)  |
| Impedance                       | M$`\Omega`$ (Megohms)   |
| Emittance                       | $`\pi * 10^{-3}`$ m.rad |
| RF power                        | MW (megawatts)          |
| Higher order mode loss factor   | V/pc                    |

Physical Units used by `MAD-X`
