# Control
## Command Format

### Input Statements

Input for `MAD-X` follows in broad lines the [`MAD-9`](http://cern.ch/mad9) format, *i.e.* free format with commas (,) as separators, although blanks may be used as separators outside {...} enclosures.

Blank input lines do not affect program execution.

The input is not case sensitive except for strings enclosed in double quotes (" ").

The input file consists of a sequence of statements. A statement may occupy any number of input lines. Several statements may be placed on the same line. A statement must be terminated by a semicolon (;).

Several statements may be grouped into a block enclosed inside a {...} enclosure. In this case the terminating semmicolon can be omitted.

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> if (a $`<`$ 3) { a=b\*b; b=2\*b+4; };
>
> </div>

or

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> if (a $`<`$ 3) { a=b\*b; b=2\*b+4; }
>
> </div>

are both valid.

### Comments

When an exclamation mark (`!`) or double forward slash (`//`) is found in the input line, the remaining characters until the end of the line are treated as a comment and are skipped.

A comment spreading over multiple lines starts with a string `/*` and ends with a string `*/`.

### Commands

The general format for a command is

> 

where the `{ }` are not part of the command and the items enclosed in `{ }` can be omitted or repeated any number of times.

A command contains three parts:

A label is required for a definition statement. A label gives a name to the stored command.

A keyword identifies the action desired.

The attributes are normally entered in the form

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> attribute-name = attribute-value
>
> </div>

and serve to define data for the command, where:

selects the attribute, and

provides its value.

If a value is to be assigned to an attribute, the `attribute-name` is mandatory.

Whenever an attribute is not explicitly given a value, the default `attribute-value` specified in the command dictionary is assumed.

### Keywords

A keyword begins with a letter and consists of letters and digits.

The `MAD-X` keywords are protected; attempting to use a protected keyword as a label results in a fatal error.

The keyword `VERSION` has been introduced since version 5.02.07. It contains the version number of the `MAD-X` release quoted as a decimal. For example:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> X:\> value VERSION;\
> version = 50207 ;
>
> </div>

This allows testing of the version number of the running `MAD-X` process. Note that any version prior to version 5.02.07 reports the value `version = 0;`

### Attribute Types

The command attributes can have one of the following types:

- String attribute,

- Logical attribute,

- Integer attribute,

- Real attribute,

- Expression,

- Range selection,

Any integer or real attribute can be replaced by a real expression; expressions are normally deferred (see [deferred expression](#sec:defer)), except in the definition of constants where they are evaluated immediately.

When a command has a [label](#sec:label), `MAD-X` keeps this command in memory. This allows repeated execution of the same command by simply entering `EXEC label;`. This construct may be nested.

### Variable Declarations

In the following, "=" means that the variable on the left receives the current value of the expression on the right, but does not depend on it any further, whereas ":=" makes the variable on the left depend on the expression on the right, *i.e.* every time the expression changes, the variable is re-evaluated, except for "const" variables.

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> var = expression;\
> var := expression;\
> xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx̄ real var = expression; // identical\
> real var := expression; // to above\
> int var = expression; // truncated if expression is real\
> int var := expression;\
> const var = expression;\
> const var := expression;\
> xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx̄ const real var = expression; // identical\
> const real var := expression; // to above\
> const int var = expression; // truncated if expression is real\
> const int var := expression;
>
> </div>

### Identifiers or Labels

A label begins with a letter, followed by up to fifteen letters, digits, decimal points (.), or underscores (\_). Characters beyond the sixteenth are dropped, but should be avoided, and the resulting sequence must be unique.

A label may refer to a keyword, an element, a beam-line, a sequence, etc.

The `MAD-X` keywords are protected; using one of them as a label results in a fatal error.

### Command Attributes

- A name or string attribute refers to an object, or a string.

- A logical attribute selects or deselects an option.

- An integer attribute defines a value stored as integer data.

- A real attribute defines a value stored as double precision data.

- A real expression defines a datum for a command, it may be varied in matching. An expression is built of a combination of operator and operand.

- A constraint specifies a matching constraint.

- A variable name selects a variable to be matched.

### Name or String Attributes

<span id="sec:string" label="sec:string"></span> A name or string attribute often selects one of a set of options:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx̄ USE, PERIOD=lhc; // expand the LHC sequence
>
> </div>

It may also refer to a user-defined object:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx̄ TWISS, FILE=optics; // specifies the name of the OPTICS output file
>
> </div>

It may also define a string:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> TITLE, "LHC version 6.2";
>
> </div>

The case of letters is only significant if a string is enclosed in quotes, otherwise all characters are converted to lowercase at reading.

On the other hand, strings that do not contain blanks do not need to be enclosed in quotes.

Example:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> CALL, FILE = "my.file";\
> CALL, FILE = my.file;\
> CALL, FILE = MY.FILE;\
> CALL, FILE = "MY.FILE";\
> CALL, FILE = ’MY.FILE’;
>
> </div>

In the first three cases, `MAD-X` will try to read a file named my.file, in the last two it will try to read the file named MY.FILE.

A string attribute makes alphanumeric information available, e.g. a title or a file name. It can contain any characters, enclosed in single (’) or double (") quotes, except for quotes of the type used as its delimiter.

Examples:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> TITLE, ’This is a title for the program run "test"’;\
> \
> SYSTEM, "ln -fns some-lengthy-directory-name local-link";
>
> </div>

### Logical Attributes

Many commands in `MAD-X` require the setting of logical values (flags) to represent the on/off state of an option. A logical value "flag" can be set in two ways:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> flag \| flag = true
>
> </div>

It can be reset by:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> -flag \| flag = false
>
> </div>

Example:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> OPTION, -ECHO; // switch off copying the input to the standard output
>
> </div>

The default for a logical flag is normally `false`, but can be found e.g. for options by the command

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> HELP, option;
>
> </div>

### Integer Attributes

An integer attribute usually denotes a count. Example:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> myline: LINE = ( -3 \* (a,b,c) );
>
> </div>

In this case, a litteral integer is requested; however, in the following

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> rfc: RFCAVITY, HARMON = 12345;
>
> </div>

or

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> rfc: RFCAVITY, HARMON = num;
>
> </div>

"num" may be an integer variable, a real variable, or an expression. In the two latter cases, the value is truncated.

### Real Attributes

Most attributes are of type REAL and are treated internally as double precision values. They may be set by integer values, real values, or expressions.

Example:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> xxxxxxx̄ ddd: drift, l = 1.2345;\
> dddd: drift, l = ddd-\>l-0.3;
>
> </div>

### Real Expressions

To facilitate the definition of interdependent quantities, any real value and integer value can be entered as an arithmetic expression. When a value used in an expression is redefined by the user or changed in a matching process, the expression is reevaluated. Expression definitions may be entered in any order. `MAD-X` evaluates them in the correct order before it performs any computation. At evaluation time all operands used must have values assigned.

An expression is built from a combination of [operator](#subsec:operator) and [operand](#subsec:operand), and it may contain [random generators](#subsubsec:random).

#### Operators in Arithmetic Expressions

An expression can be formed using the following operators:

##### Arithmetic operators

Addition,

Subtraction,

Multiplication,

Division,

Exponentiation.

##### Ordinary Functions

square root,

natural logarithm,

logarithm base 10,

exponential,

trigonometric sine,

trigonometric cosine,

trigonometric tangent,

arc sine,

arc cosine,

arc tangent,

hyperbolic sine,

hyperbolic cosine,

hyperbolic tangent,

cardinal sine function,

absolute value,

Gauss error,

complementary error,

floor, largest previous integer,

ceiling, smallest next integer,

round, closest integer;

fractional part of number;

##### Random Number Generators

random number, uniformly distributed in \[0,1\],

random number, gaussian distribution with unit standard deviation,

random number, gaussian distribution with unit standard deviation, truncated at x standard deviations;

in the above cases, "x" can be any expression, i.e. contain other functions, variable or constant expressions. To initialize the `MAD-X` random generator use the [`EOPTION`](#sec:eoption) or [`COPTION`](#sec:coption) commands. Note that the command [`TRACK`](#sec:track) with `QUANTUM` attribute set to true may set or reset the seed too.

The command [`OPTION`](#sec:option) has two attributes to control the new random generator of MAD-X. The attribute `RAND` can take the value `default` (for backward compatibility) or `best` for the new generator. The latter supports 10 multiple independent generators numbered from 1 to 10, and can be selected with the attribute `RANDID=id` in combination to `RAND`. If `RANDID` is not specified and `RAND=best`, then the last `id` set is used (init: 1). The user can switch between the 10 independent generators at will to use different streams for the next generated random numbers. When a new seed is set through to command [`EOPTION`](#sec:eoption), [`COPTION`](#sec:coption) or [`TRACK`](#sec:track), it will only affect the currently selected stream. The special initial seed for the `best` generator can be restored by using the value zero instead of the commands default 123456789.

The following example displays the first 10 random numbers of the 10 streams of the `best` generator, using the default initial seed.

    option, -info;
    i = 1;
    while (i <= 10) {
      option, rand=best, randid=i;
      j = 1;
      while(j <= 10) {
        value, i, j, ranf();
        j = j+1;
      }
      i = i+1;
    }

##### Table Access Functions

identical to TABLE(x,z,1); example: table(summ,q1) returns the hor. tune of the Twiss summary table "summ".

accesses value of the named table column "z" for element "y" (first table row with that name) of table "x"; example: table(twiss,mb.12,betx) returns the beta_x at element mb.12 from the Twiss table "twiss". When the element is called with its proper name, as in the example above, the value is returned at the first occurrence of the element of this name. If the value is needed at an occurrence number: NNN, then "\[NNN\]" has to be appended to the name, e.g. in the above example one obtains the betx of the 23th occurrence of the element "mb.12" by changing the example to: "table(twiss,mb.12\[23\],betx)". Mind you that the old, but little known, form: "table(twiss,mb.12-\>23,betx)" continues to work. Lastly, if NNN exceeds the maximum occurrence number the return value is arbitrarily small.

accesses the value of the named table column "z" at the "N_row" number of rows of table "x" (row numbers start at 1); example: table(twiss,betx,370) returns the beta_x at row number "370" of the Twiss table "twiss". The return value is zero if "N_row" is outside of the allowed range.

identical to TABINDEX(x,z,1,key).

returns the index of the first occurrence of a string starting by "key" in table column "z" (must be a column of strings) starting at the "N_row" number of rows of table "x"; example: tabindex(survey,name,102,bpm) returns the row number of the first element found starting from row 102 with a "name" beginning by "bpm" in the table "survey".

accesses value of the named table column "z" (must be a column of strings) at the "N_row" number of rows of table "x"; example: tabstring(survey,name,10) returns the name of the 10th element of the survey table "survey". Row count starts at 1. The function can be used in any context where a string appears; in case there is no match, it returns "\_void\_".

Note that "N_row" has to be a number and not a variable. However, the [Macro](#sec:macro) facility in `MAD-X` allows the use of a variable instead.

    gettab(tblname, colname, rowidx) : macro = {
      gettab.val = table(tblname, colname, rowidx) ;
    }
    getidx(tblname, colname, rowidx, keyname) : macro = {
      getidx.val = tabindex(tblname, colname, rowidx, keyname) ;
    }
    row = 10 ;
    exec, gettab(twiss,betx,$row) ;
    exec, getidx(twiss,name,$row,qf) ;
    value, gettab.val, getidx.val ;

Beware:

- Unnamed Drifts are not included in the table name database, so as to speed up the search for "real" elements. Therefore, those unnamed drifts cannot be found. However, named drifts can be searched for.

- Due to the importance of finding elements in the table for a proper functioning of the `MAD-X` runs, the programs throws a "fatal_error" if an element cannot be found in the table.

A typical example could look like this, in fact the square root of betx (user defined variable myvar) is added to the twiss table:

    myvar := sqrt(table(twiss,betx));
    select, flag=twiss, column=name, s, myvar, betx;
    twiss, file;

Or another arbitrary test case of adding k1l taken from the Twiss table:

Define macro:

    mymacro(xx,yy,zz): macro = {myval = table(xx,yy,zz);};

Use macro in loop:

    i = 0;
    incval = 0;
    while (i < 100) {
      value, i;
      exec, mymacro(twiss,k1l,$i);
      incval = incval + myval;
      value, i, myval, incval;                
      i = i + 1;
    }

#### Operands in Arithmetic Expressions

An expression may contain the following operands:

##### Literal Constants

Numerical values are entered like FORTRAN constants. Real values are accepted in INTEGER or REAL format. The use of a decimal exponent, marked by the letter D or E, is permitted.

Examples:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> 1, 10.35, 5E3, 314.1592E-2
>
> </div>

##### Symbolic constants

`MAD-X` recognizes some [mathematical and physical constants](#tab-constants). Their names must not be used for user-defined labels.

Additional symbolic constants may be defined to simplify their repeated use in statements and expressions.

> 

defines a real constant with the name given. An existing symbolic constant can be redefined, but it cannot change in a matching procedure.

Example:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> CONST IN = 0.0254;
>
> </div>

A number of predefined symbolic constants exist in `MAD-X` and can be used in expressions. The values of physical constants are regularly updated to reflect the values published by the Particle Data Group The values published in 2014 () have not changed with respect to the values published in 2012 ().

<div id="tab-constants">

| **`MAD-X` name** | **symbol** | **value** | **unit** |
|:---|:--:|:--:|:--:|
| PI | $`\pi`$ | 4 \* atan(1) | 1 |
| TWOPI | $`2\pi`$ | 2 \* PI | 1 |
| DEGRAD | $`180/\pi`$ | 180 / PI | deg/rad |
| RADDEG | $`\pi/180`$ | PI / 180 | rad/deg |
| E | e | exp(1) | 1 |
| EMASS | $`m_e`$ | $`0.510998928\times 10^{-3}`$ | GeV |
| PMASS | $`m_p`$ | 0.938272046 | GeV |
| NMASS | $`u`$ | 0.931494061 | GeV |
| MUMASS | $`m_\mu`$ | 0.1056583715 | GeV |
| CLIGHT | $`c`$ | $`2.99792458\times 10^{8}`$ | m/s |
| QELECT | $`e`$ | $`1.602176565\times 10^{-19}`$ | A.s |
| HBAR | $`\hbar`$ | $`6.58211928\times 10^{-25}`$ | MeV.s |
| ERAD | $`r_e`$ | $`2.8179403267\times 10^{-15}`$ | m |
| PRAD | $`r_e (m_e / m_p)`$ | ERAD\*EMASS/PMASS | m |

Predefined Symbolic Constants in `MAD-X`

</div>

Note that the `NMASS` constant in `MAD-X` is the unified atomic mass unit and not the neutron mass.

##### Parameter labels

Often a set of numerical values depends on a common variable parameter. Such a parameter must be defined as a global parameter. A global parameter always has a current value; however, this value may be re-evaluated or not, depending on the parameter definition:

    x = a;

`x` is set to the current value of `a` and not changed, even if `a` changes. This makes assignments such as

    x = x + 1;

perfectly valid (this replaces the deprecated `SET` instruction).

The definition of the deferred expression

    x := a;

assign the current value of `a` to `x` every time `x` is used, *i.e.* it is re-evaluated using the latest value of `a`; therefore,

    x := x + 1;

results in an infinite loop (!) when `x` is used, which results in abnormnal termination of `MAD-X`.

Of course, the following definitions are equivalent:

    x = 0.1;
    x := 0.1;

When such a parameter is used in an expression, `MAD-X` uses the current value of the parameter if the expression is deferred:

Example:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> x := 1.0;\
> d1: drift, l = x;\
> d2: drift, l := 2.0 - x;\
>
> </div>

When the value of `x` is changed, the length of the drift `d1` remains unchanged, while the length of the drift `d2` is recalculated.

##### Element or Command Attributes

In arithmetic expressions the attributes of physical elements or commands can occur as operands. They are named respectively by

> 

Values are assigned to attributes in element definitions or commands.

Example:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> xxxxxxxx̄ D1: DRIFT, L= 1.0;\
> D2: DRIFT, L= 2.0 - D1-\>L;
>
> </div>

`D1->L` refers to the length `L` of the drift space `D1`.

#### Expressions and Random Values

The definition of random machine imperfections requires evaluation of expressions containing random functions. These are evaluated like any other expression when the expression is used, i.e. only once if a "=" assignment refers to it, or every time if the assignment is ":="; this latter case is used by the error generation routines.

Example:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> a := 3\*ranf();
>
> </div>

Every time `a` is used, it gets a random value assigned from a uniform distribution between 0 and 3.

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> error: ealign, range, dx:=sigma\*gauss();
>
> </div>

All elements in range are assigned independent random displacements sampled from a Gaussian distribution with standard deviation sigma.

### Logical Expressions

In matching it is desired to specify equality constraints, as well as lower and upper limits for a quantity. `MAD-X` accepts the following forms of constraints:

> 

### Variable Names

A variable name can have one of the formats:

> 

The first format refers to the value of the global parameter `parameter-name`.

The second and third formats refer to the real attribute `attribute-name` of the element `element-name`, or the command `command-name`.

The fourth format is specific to beams belonging to a particular sequence (for details see [sequences](#chap:sequence) and [beams](#chap:beam)).

The fifth format allows extraction of variables from existing tables, as specified in [table access](#chap:tables).

### Regular Expressions

Some commands allow selection of items via "regular expression" strings. Such a pattern string **must** be enclosed in single or double quotes. `MAD-X` follows regexp (Unix regular expression patterns) for matching. The following features are implemented:

A "search string" below is the string containing the pattern, a "target string" is the string being searched for a possible match with the pattern.

at the start of the search string: Match following search string at the start of the target string; otherwise the search string can start anywhere in the target string. To search for a genuine "^" anywhere, use "$`\backslash`$^".

at the end of the search string: Match preceding search string at the end of the target string; otherwise the search string can end anywhere in the target string. To search for a genuine "\$" anywhere, use "$`\backslash`$\$".

stands for an arbitrary character; to search for a genuine ".", use "$`\backslash`$."

stands for one character belonging to the string contained in brackets (example: "\[abc\]" means one of a, b, c).

stands for ranges of characters (example: "\[a-zA-Z\]" means any letter).

(i.e. a "^" as first character in a square bracket) stands for exclusion of all characters in the list, i.e. "\[^a-z\]" means "any character but a lower case letter".

allows zero or more repetitions of the preceding character, either specified directly, or from a list. (examples: "a\*" means zero or more occurrences of "a", "\[A-Z\]\*" means zero or more upper-case letters).

(e.g. "$`\backslash`$.") removes the special meaning of character c.

All other characters stand for themselves.

Example:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> SELECT, FLAG=twiss, PATTERN="^d..\$" ;\
> SELECT, FLAG=twiss, PATTERN="^k.\*qd.\*$`\backslash`$.r1\$" ;
>
> </div>

The first command selects all elements whose names have exactly three characters and begin with the letter "D". The second command selects elements beginning with the letter "K", containing the string "QD", and ending with the string ".R1". The two occurrences of ".\*" each stand for an arbitrary number (including zero) of any character, and the occurrence "$`\backslash`$." stands for a literal period.

### Relations between Variable Parameters

<span id="sec:defer" label="sec:defer"></span> A relation is established between variables by one of two statements

> 

The first form evaluates the expression on the right immediately and assigns its value to the parameter. It is an immediate assignment.

The second form assigns the value by evaluating the expression on the right every time the parameter is actually used. It is a deferred assignment.

This mechanism holds as well for element parameters that can be defined with either immediate or deferred assignments.

Attention! If you want to modify e.g. the strength of a quadrupole later (e.g. in a match, or by entering a new value for a parameter on which it depends) then the defition has to be

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> QD: QUADRUPOLE, K1 := ak1;
>
> </div>

and not

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> QD: QUADRUPOLE, K1 = ak1;
>
> </div>

In the latter case, K1 will be set to the current value of ak1 at the time of declaration, and will not change when ak1 later changes.

Parameters that have not yet been defined at time of evaluation have a zero value.

Example:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> gev = 100;\
> BEAM, ENERGY=gev;
>
> </div>

The parameter on the left may appear on the right as well in the computer science form of assignments:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> x = x+1;
>
> </div>

increases the value of x by 1.\
Successive definitions are allowed in the first form of relations or immediate assignments:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> a = b + 2;\
> b = a \* b;
>
> </div>

But circular definitions in the second form of relations, or deferred assignments, are forbidden:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> a := b + 2;\
> b := a \* b;
>
> </div>

results in an error.
