# Control
## Program Flow Statements

### IF...ELSEIF...ELSE

> 

where "logical_expression" is one of

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> xxxxxxxx̄xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx̄xxxx̄ expr1 oper expr2\
> expr11 oper1 expr12 && expr21 oper2 expr22\
> expr11 oper1 expr12 \|\| expr21 oper2 expr22
>
> </div>

and `oper` is one of

equal

not equal

less than

greater than

less than or equal

greater than or equal

The expressions are arithmetic expressions of type real. The statements in the curly brackets are executed if the logical expression is true.

`ELSEIF` constructs are only possible (in any number) behind an `IF`, or another `ELSEIF`; the branch is executed if "logical_expression" is true, and if none of the preceding `IF` or `ELSEIF` logical conditions was true.

`ELSE` construct is only possible once behind an `IF`, or an `ELSEIF`; the branch is executed if "logical_expression" is true, and if none of the preceding `IF` or `ELSEIF` logical conditions was true.

**Warning:**\
Because `IF ... ELSEIF ... ELSE` constructs are a `MAD-X` special feature and not part of a full language, `MAD-X` does not deal gracefully with other special constructs such as `MACRO` or `LINE` when they are placed inside `IF ... ELSEIF ... ELSE` statements: this can lead to silent and/or catastrophic errors and is due to the fact that `MACRO` and `LINE` constructs contain, either explicitly or implicitly, a closing curly bracket that unbalances the `IF ... ELSEIF ... ELSE` statements.

However it is possible to nest `IF ... ELSEIF ... ELSE` constructs to at least six levels deep.

### WHILE

> 

executes the statements in curly brackets while the logical_expression is true.

**Warning:**\
Because `WHILE` constructs are a `MAD-X` special feature and not part of a full language, `MAD-X` does not deal gracefully with other special constructs such as `MACRO` or `LINE` when they are placed inside `WHILE` statement blocks: this can lead to silent and/or catastrophic errors and is due to the fact that `MACRO` and `LINE` constructs contain, either explicitly or implicitly, a closing curly bracket that unbalances the `WHILE` statements.

However it is possible to nest `WHILE` statements to at least six levels deep.

Example giving the value of the first ten factorials:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> n = 1; m = 1;\
> while (n \<= 10) {\
> m = m \* n; value, m;\
> n = n + 1;\
> };
>
> </div>

### MACRO

The MACRO construct allows the execution of a group of statements via a single command. Optionally the MACRO construct takes arguments.

> 

The first form allows the execution of the defined group of statements via a single command,

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> EXEC, label;
>
> </div>

that executes the statements defined between curly brackets exactly once. The `EXEC` command can then be issued any number of times.

The second form allows to replace strings anywhere inside the statements in curly brackets by other strings, or integer numbers prior to execution. This is a powerful construct and should be handled with care.

Simple example:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> simple(xx,yy): MACRO = { xx = yy\*yy + xx; VALUE, xx;};\
> a = 3; b = 5;\
> EXEC, simple(a,b);
>
> </div>

yields

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> a = 28 ;
>
> </div>

**Passing arguments**\
In the following example we use the fact that a "\$" in front of an argument means that the truncated integer value of this argument is used for replacement, rather than the argument string itself.

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> tricky(xx,yy,zz): MACRO = {mzz.yy: xx, l = 1.yy, kzz = k.yy;};\
> n=0;\
> WHILE (̄n \< 3) {\
> n = n+1;\
> EXEC, tricky(quadrupole, \$n, 1);\
> EXEC, tricky(sextupole, \$n, 2);\
> };
>
> </div>

Because `MACRO` statements are a `MAD-X` construct and not part of a full language, `MAD-X` allows only one level of inclusion of another `IF ... ELSEIF ... ELSE`, `WHILE` or `MACRO` statements.

Macros cannot be called with number arguments but always with string arguments. In case numerical values should be passed to a `MACRO` in an `EXEC` statement, one can conveniently use variables names:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> n1=99; n2=219;\
> EXEC, thismacro(\$n1, \$n2);
>
> </div>

instead of

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> EXEC, thismacro(\$99, \$129); ! fails...
>
> </div>
