# Control
## General Control Statements

`MAD-X` consists of a core program, and modules for specific tasks such as [twiss parameter calculation](#chap:twiss), [matching](#chap:match), [thin lens tracking](#chap:thintrack), *etc.*

The statements listed here are those executed by the program core. They deal with the I/O, element and sequence declaration, sequence manipulation, statement flow control (e.g. `IF, WHILE`), `MACRO` declaration, saving sequences onto files in `MAD-X` or `MAD-8` format, *etc.*

### EXIT, QUIT, STOP

<span id="sec:quit" label="sec:quit"></span><span id="sec:stop" label="sec:stop"></span> Any of these three commands ends the execution of `MAD-X`:

> 

> 

> 

### HELP

The `HELP` command prints all parameters, and their defaults values, for the statement given; this includes basic element types.

> 

### SHOW

The `SHOW` command prints the `command` (typically `beam`, `beam%sequ`, or an element name), with the actual value of all its parameters.

> 

### VALUE

The `VALUE` command evaluates the current value of all listed expressions, constants or variables, and prints the result in the form of `MAD-X` statements on the assigned output file.

> 

Example:\

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> a = clight/1000.;\
> value, a, pmass, exp(sqrt(2));
>
> </div>

results in

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> a = 299792.458 ;\
> pmass = 0.938272046 ;\
> exp(sqrt(2)) = 4.113250379 ;\
>
> </div>

### OPTION

The `OPTION` commands sets the logical value of a number of flags that control the behavior of `MAD-X`.

> 

Because all attributes of `OPTION` are logical flags, the following two statements are identical:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> OPTION, flag = true;\
> OPTION, flag;
>
> </div>

And the following two statements are also identical:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> OPTION, flag = false;\
> OPTION, -flag;
>
> </div>

Several flags can be set in a single `OPTION` command, e.g.

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> OPTION, ECHO, WARN=true, -INFO, VERBOSE=false;
>
> </div>

The available flags, their default values and their effect on `MAD-X` when they are set to `TRUE` are listed in table <a href="#table:options" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="table:options">4.1</a>. Note that to obtain the proper physics in [`TRACK`](#sec:track) with `BBORBIT` set to false, one must enable the search for the closed orbit (i.e. not use [`ONEPASS`](#sec:track)).

<span id="table:options" label="table:options"></span>

<div id="table:options">

| **FLAG** | **default** | **effect if `TRUE`** |
|:---|:--:|:---|
| `ECHO` | true | echoes the input on the standard output file |
| `WARN` | true | issues warning statements |
| `INFO` | true | issues information statements |
| `DEBUG` | false | issues debugging information |
| `ECHOMACRO` | false | issues macro expansion printout for debugging |
| `VERBOSE` | false | issues additional printout in makethin |
| `TRACE` | false | prints the system time after each command |
| `VERIFY` | false | issues a warning if an undefined variable is used |
| `TELL` | false | prints the current value of all options |
| `RESET` | false | resets all options to their defaults |
| `NO_FATAL_STOP` | false | Prevents madx from stopping in case of a fatal error |
|  |  | **Use at your own risk !** |
| `KEEP_EXP_MOVE` | true | keeps the expression of the location after a move command |
| `RBARC` | true | converts the RBEND straight length into the arc length |
| `THIN_FOC` | true | enables the $`1/\rho^2`$ focusing of thin dipoles |
| `BBORBIT` | false | the closed orbit is modified by beam-beam kicks |
| `SYMPL` | true | all element matrices are symplectified in Twiss |
| `TWISS_PRINT` | true | controls whether the twiss command produces output |
| `THREADER` | false | enables the threader for closed orbit finding in Twiss |
|  |  | (see Twiss module) |

Flags available to `OPTION` command

</div>

The option `RBARC` is implemented for backwards compatibility with `MAD-8` up to version 8.23.06 included; in this version, the `RBEND` length was just taken as the arc length of an `SBEND` with inclined pole faces, contrary to the `MAD-8` manual.

### EXEC

Each statement may be preceded by a label, when parsed and executed the statement is then also stored and can be executed again with

> 

This mechanism can be invoked any number of times, and the executed statement may be calling another `EXEC`, etc.

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> tw: TWISS, FILE, SAVE; ! first execution of TWISS\
> ...\
> EXEC, tw; ! second execution of the same TWISS command\
>
> </div>

Note however, that the main usage of this `MAD-X` construct is the execution of a [`MACRO`](#sec:macro).

### SET

The `SET` command is used in two forms:

> 

The first form of the `SET` command defines the formats for the output precision that `MAD-X` uses with the `SAVE`, `SHOW`, `VALUE` and `TABLE` commands. The formats can be given in any order and stay valid until replaced.

The formats follow the C convention and must be included in double quotes. The allowed formats are\
*n*`d` for integers with a field-width = *n*,\
*n.m*`f` or *n.m*`g` or *n.m*`e` for floats with field-width = *n* and precision = *m*,\
*n*`s` for strings with a field-width = *n*.\
The default is "right adjusted", a "-" changes it to "left adjusted".

**Example:**\

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> SET, FORMAT="12d", "-18.5e", "25s";
>
> </div>

The default formats are `"10d", "18.10g"` and `"-18s"`.

Example:

    set, format="22.14e";

changes the current floating point format to `22.14e`; the other formats remain unchanged.

    set, format="s","d","g";

sets all formats to automatic adjustment according to C conventions.

The second form of the `SET` command allows to select the current sequence without the [`USE`](#sec:use) command, which would bring back to a bare lattice without errors. The command only works if the chosen sequence has been previously activated with a [`USE`](#sec:use) command, otherwise a warning is issued and `MAD-X` continues with the unmodified current sequence. This command is particularly useful for commands that do not have the sequence as an argument like [`EMIT`](#chap:emit) or [`IBS`](#chap:ibs).

### SYSTEM

> 

transfers the quoted `string` to the operating system for execution. The quotes are stripped and no check of the return status is performed by `MAD-X`.

**Example:**

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> SYSTEM, "ln -s /afs/cern.ch/user/j/joe/input shortname";
>
> </div>

makes a local link to an AFS directory with the name `shortname` on a `UNIX` system.

**Attention:** Although this command is very convenient, it is clearly not portable across systems and it should probably be avoided if one intends to share `MAD-X` scripts with collaborators working on other platforms.

### TITLE

> 

defines a `string` that is inserted as title in various table outputs and plot results.

### USE

`MAD-X` operates on beamlines that must be loaded and expanded in memory before other commands can be invoked. The `USE` command allows this loading and expansion.

> 

The attributes to the `USE` command are:

name of the sequence to be loaded and expanded.

name of the sequence to be loaded and expanded.\
`PERIOD` is an alias to `SEQUENCE` that was kept for backwards compatibility with `MAD-8` and only one of them should be specified in a `USE` statement.

specifies a [range](#sec:range). restriction so that only the specified part of the named sequence is loaded and expanded.

option to plug the survey data into the sequence elements nodes on the first pass (see [`SURVEY`](#chap:survey)).

Note that reloading a sequence with the `USE` command reloads a bare sequence and that any [`ERROR`](#chap:error) or orbit correction previously assigned or associated to the sequence are discarded. A mechanism to select a sequence without this side effect of the `USE` command is provided with the [`SET, SEQUENCE=...`](#sec:set) command.

### SELECT

Some `MAD-X` commands can perform specific operations on selected elements or ranges of elements and can produce specific output for selected elements or ranges of elements.

The selection is made through the `SELECT` command and applies to subsequent commands.

> 

The attributes to the `SELECT` command are:

determines the applicability of the `SELECT` statement and the attribute value can be one of the following:

selection of elements for the [`SEQEDIT`](#sec:seqedit) module.

selection of elements for the [error assignment](#chap:error) module.

selection of elements for the [`MAKETHIN`](#chap:makethin) command that converts the sequence into one with thin elements.

selection of elements for the [`SECTORMAP`](#sec:sectormap) output file from the [`TWISS`](#chap:twiss) module.

selection of elements for the [`SAVE`](#sec:save) command.

selection of interpolation points for the [`TWISS`](#chap:twiss) command.

is a table name such as `twiss`, `track` etc., and the rows and columns to be written are selected.

the range of elements to be selected as defined in section <a href="#sec:range" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:range">3.1</a> on [range](#sec:range) selection.

the class of elements to be selected as defined in section <a href="#sec:class" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:class">3.2</a> on [class](#sec:class) selection.

the regular expression pattern for the element names to be selected as defined in section <a href="#sec:regex" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:regex">2.16</a> on selection via [regular expressions](#sec:regex).

the name of a sequence to which the selection is applied.

a logical falg to select ALL positions in the sequence for the named flag.\
For the flag `TWISS`, this attribute includes all standard columns for a `TWISS` table, and therefore the following two statements are equivalent:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> SELECT, FLAG=twiss, COLUMN= name, s, betx, ..., var1;\
> SELECT, FLAG=twiss, FULL, COLUMN= var1;
>
> </div>

`FULL=true` is the default for the `MAKETHIN` flag and for tables: *e.g.* `SELECT, FLAG=makethin;` is equivalent to `SELECT, FLAG=makethin, FULL;`

deselects ALL positions in the sequence for the flag "name".

is only valid for tables and takes as attribute value a list of columns to be written into the TFS file. The special "\_name" argument refers to the actual name of the element.

is the number of slices into which the selected elements have to be cut and is only used by [`MAKETHIN`](#chap:makethin) and [`FLAG=INTERPOLATE`](#chap:twiss). (Default = 1).

is a logical flag to indicate whether the selected elements are treated as thick elements by the [`MAKETHIN`](#chap:makethin) command.\
This only applies up to now to [`QUADRUPOLE`](#sec:quadrupole)s and [`BEND`](#sec:bend)s for which thick maps have been explicitely derived.

output intermediate values every `STEP` meters in the [`TWISS`](#chap:twiss) command.

manual specification of interpolation points for the [`TWISS`](#chap:twiss) command. Specified as a fraction of the node length, i.e. a value of 0.5 slices at the centre of the element.

**Composition of `SELECT` statements:**\
The selection criteria provided on a single `SELECT` statement are logically `AND`ed, *i.e.* selected elements have to fulfill **all** provided criteria in the single `SELECT` statement.

The selection criteria on different `SELECT` statements are logically `OR`ed, *i.e.* selected elements have to fulfill **any** of the selection criteria provided by the different `SELECT` statements.

All selections for a given flag remain valid until a `SELECT` statement with the `CLEAR` argument is specified for the same flag.

Note that because of these composition rules, it is considered good practice to start by clearing the selection for a given flag before making a new selection, eg:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> SELECT, FLAG=twiss, CLEAR;\
> SELECT, FLAG=twiss, CLASS=MQ;\
> SELECT, FLAG=twiss, RANGE=MQ\[5\]/MQ\[7\];\
> ...
>
> </div>

**Examples:**

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> SELECT, FLAG = ERROR, CLASS = quadrupole, RANGE = mb\[1\]/mb\[5\];\
> SELECT, FLAG = ERROR, PATTERN = "^mqw.\*";
>
> </div>

selects all quadrupoles in the range mb\[1\] to mb\[5\], as well as all elements (in the whole sequence) with name starting with "mqw", for treatment by the [`ERROR`](#chap:error) module.

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> SELECT, FLAG=SAVE, CLASS=variable, PATTERN="abc.\*";\
> SAVE, FILE=mysave;
>
> </div>

saves all variables containing "abc" in their name, but does not save elements with names containing "abc" since the class "variable" does not exist.

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> sig1 := sqrt(beam-\>ex\*table(twiss,betx));\
> SELECT, FLAG=twiss, COLUMN= \_name, s, betx, ..., sig1; ! or equivalently\
> SELECT, FLAG=twiss, FULL, COLUMN= sig1; ! default columns + new
>
> </div>

writes the current value of “sig1” into the `TWISS` table each time a new line is added; Note that the values from the same (current) line can be are accessed by the variable “sig1”. The [`PLOT`](#chap:plot) command also accepts the new variable in the table.
