# Control
## File Handling Statements

Note that the filenames given as attribute values in File Handling statements must be explicit names and should not contain wildcard characters since the filename strings are not passed to the underlying Operating System for evaluation.

### ASSIGN

> 

where `filename` is either the name of an output file, or the string `terminal`. This allows switching the echo stream to a file or back to the terminal, but only for the commands [`VALUE`](#sec:value), [`SHOW`](#sec:show), and [`PRINT`](#sec:print). Allows easy composition of future `MAD-X` input files.

`TRUNCATE` specifies whether the file is truncated when opened (ignored for terminal).

### CALL

> 

where `filename` is the name of an input file. The named file is then read until a `RETURN` statement is encountered, or until the End_Of_File; The file being "called" may in turn contain any number of `CALL` statements itself, and so on to any depth.

### CHDIR

> 

changes the current working directory to the specified folder. Both relative and absolute pathes are possible.

### RETURN

> 

ends the reading from a "called" file. If encountered in the standard input file, it ends the program execution.

### PRINT

> 

prints the quoted text `string` to the current output file (see [`ASSIGN`](#sec:assign) above). The text can be edited with the help of a [macro](#sec:macro) statement.

### PRINTF

> 

prints the numerical values specified in the `VALUE` field to the current output file, with formatting according to the format string provided in the `TEXT` field.

The string format can take numeric C or `MAD-X` format specifiers for double real values. Integer and string formats are not supported but can be approximated with the `%g` format in the case of integers, and via [`MACRO`](#sec:macro) statements, which perform string substitution, themselves containing a [`PRINT`](#sec:print) statement.

The maximum number of values that can be printed in one statement is limited to 100.

If the number of format specifiers given in the string is higher than the number of values in the value field, undefined values are printed where they are not explicitly provided.

If the number of format specifiers given in the string is lower than the number of values in the value field, the values that do not correspond to a format specifier are ignored.

**Example:**

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> xxxxxxxx̄xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx̄ a = 1.2; b = 3.4/0.3; c := 0.8\*a/b;\
> PRINTF, TEXT="String with floats a=%f, b=%.3g, text and MAD float c=%F;",\
> VALUE = a,b,c;\
> PRINTF, TEXT="More specifiers than values: %f, %.3g, %F", VALUE = a,b;\
> PRINTF, TEXT="More values than specifiers: %f, %.3g", VALUE = a,b,c;
>
> </div>

produces the following output:

    String with floats a=1.200000, b=11.3, text and MAD float c=  0.08470588235;
    More specifiers than values: 1.200000, 11.3,   6.953222976e-310
    More values than specifiers: 1.200000, 11.3

Note that `PRINTF`, like `PRINT`, produces output that cannot be read back by `MAD-X`. For output that can be read back by `MAD-X`, use the command `VALUE` or TFS tables.

Note also that a percent sign (%) can be printed using the format `text="%%"`.

### RENAMEFILE

> 

renames the file `filename` to `new_filename` on disk.\
This command is more portable than an equivalent [`SYSTEM`](#sec:system) call:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> SYSTEM("mv filename new_filename"); ! Unix specific
>
> </div>

### COPYFILE

> 

copies the file `filename` to the file `new_filename` on disk.

The attribute `APPEND=true` causes `COPYFILE` to append the content of `filename` at the end of the file `new_filename`.\
The default value `APPEND=false` causes the replacement of the content of `new_filename` with the content of `filename`.

`COPYFILE, APPEND=true...` is more portable than an equivalent [`SYSTEM`](#sec:system) call:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> SYSTEM("copy /y filename new_filename"); ! Windows specific
>
> </div>

### REMOVEFILE

> 

removes the file `filename` from disk.\
It is more portable than an equivalent [`SYSTEM`](#sec:system) call:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> SYSTEM("rm filename"); ! Unix specific
>
> </div>
