# Control
## Table Handling Statements

### CREATE

> 

creates a table with the specified variables as columns. The table created is initially empty and can be subsequently [filled](#sec:fill), and eventually [written](#sec:write) to file in [`TFS`](#chap:tfs) format.

The special variable name attribute `_name` (name preceded by underscore) adds the element name to the table at the specified column.

### DELETE

> 

deletes a sequence with name `seqname` or a table with name `tabname` from memory. The sequence deletion is done without influence on other sequences that may have elements that werein common with the deleted sequence.

### READTABLE

> 

reads the `TFS` file `filename` containing a `MAD-X` table loads the table into memory with the name `tabname`. If the table name is not specified, use the name specified in the information section of the TFS file. The table can then be manipulated as any other table, *i.e.* its values can be accessed, its data can be plotted or changed, and it can be written out again.

### READMYTABLE

> 

deprecated alias for `READTABLE`.

### WRITE

> 

writes the table "tabname" onto the file "filename"; only the rows and columns of a preceding `SELECT, FLAG=table,...;` are written. If no `SELECT` has been issued for this table, only the header is written to file. If the FILE argument is omitted, the table is written to standard output.

### SETVARS

The `SETVARS` command sets the variables with values extracted from the row of a table.

> 

The attributes of `SETVARS` are:

the name of the table. (Default: none)

the row number containing the values. (Default: -1)

Negative `ROW` values are allowed and count the row numbers from the last row, allowing access to the table in reverse order of rows: `ROW = -1` accesses the last row of the table, `ROW = -2` accesses the penultimate (one before last) row, etc…

Trying to access the table forward beyond the last row, i.e. `ROW` strictly greater than `nrow` the number of rows in the table, or trying to access the table backwards before the first row, i.e. `ROW` strictly lower than `-nrow`, or trying to access the illegal `ROW=0`, all result in a “row out of bound” message and no variable values are returned and set.

### SETVARS_LIN

The `SETVARS_LIN` command sets the variables with values calculated by linear interpolation, or extrapolation, between two rows of a table.

> 

The attributes of `SETVARS_LIN` are:

the name of the table. (Default: none)

a first row number with values for interpolation. (Default: 0)

a second row number with values for interpolation. (Default: 0)

a string containing the linear interpolation factor or the name of a variable or expression containing the interpolation factor. If the resulting value of `PARAM` is outside the $`[0,1]`$ interval, the result is a linear extrapolation.\
(Default: "interp", itself defaulting to a value of 0.0 when evaluated)

`SETVARS_LIN` sets the variables with values calculated through the following formula that `MAD-X` constructs internally as a deferred expression which is immediately evaluated:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> value := value(row1)\*(1-param) + value(row2)\*param;
>
> </div>

Both the expression and the value of the expression are available to the user through respectively the commands [`SHOW`](#sec:show) and [`VALUE`](#sec:value).

When the values are represented as strings, *e.g.* the name or keyword of elements, the resulting value is the string in `ROW1`.

Negative `ROW`*`i`* values are allowed and count the row numbers from the last row, allowing access to the table in reverse order of rows: `ROW`*`i`*` = -1` accesses the last row of the table, `ROW`*`i`*` = -2` accesses the penultimate (one before last) row, etc…

Trying to access the table forward beyond the last row, i.e. `ROW`*`i`* strictly greater than `nrow` the number of rows in the table, or trying to access the table backwards before the first row, i.e. `ROW`*`i`* strictly lower than `-nrow`, or trying to access the illegal `ROW`*`i`*`=0`, all result in a “row out of bound” message and the expression is not constructed or evaluated.

**Example:**

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> ! extracts the position of the centre of each element from a standard\
> ! TWISS table giving positions at end of elements:\
> len = table(twiss,tablelength);\
> interpolate = 0.5;\
> i = 2;\
> WHILE (̄i \< len) {\
> SETVARS_LIN, TABLE=twiss, ROW1=i-1, ROW2=i, PARAM=interpolate;\
> ! now variables are interpolated at the center of the elements.\
> ! in particular S holds the position of the center of the element.\
> SHOW, s; VALUE, s;\
> …\
> i = i + 1; };
>
> </div>

### SETVARS_KNOB

The `SETVARS_KNOB` command creates or manipulates the expression for the variables by adding a term `"+ val * knob"` where val is extracted from the row of a table and knob from the command.

> 

The attributes of `SETVARS` are:

the name of the table. (Default: none)

the row number containing the values. (Default: -1)

the name of the knob. (Default: none)

when true the term is not appended but replace the exisint value or expression.

Negative `ROW` values are allowed and count the row numbers from the last row, allowing access to the table in reverse order of rows: `ROW = -1` accesses the last row of the table, `ROW = -2` accesses the penultimate (one before last) row, etc…

### SETVARS_CONST

The `SETVARS_CONST` sets the value for the variables to constant.

> 

The attributes of `SETVARS` are:

the name of the table. (Default: none)

the value used to set the variables. (Default: 0)

### FILL

The `FILL` command fills a row of a table with the current values of all declared column variables of the table.

> 

The `FILL` command takes two arguments:

is the name of the table to be filled. The table must have been [created](#sec:create) beforehand. The table can then be [written](#sec:write) to file in `TFS` format.

is the row number to be filled with the current values of all column variables.\
`ROW=0`, or `ROW=nrow + 1`, where `nrow` is the current number of rows in the table, causes `FILL` to add a row at the end of the table and fill it with the current values of all column variables.\
(Default: 0)

Negative `ROW` values are allowed and count the row numbers from the last row, allowing access to the table in reverse order of rows: `ROW = -1` accesses the last row of the table, `ROW = -2` accesses the penultimate (one before last) row, etc…

Trying to access the table forward beyond the last row, i.e. `ROW` strictly greater than `nrow + 1`, where `nrow` is the number of rows in the table, or trying to access the table backwards before the first row, i.e. `ROW` strictly lower than `-nrow`, both result in a “row out of bound” message and no values are filled in the table.

**Reminder:** One can get access to the current number of rows in a table using the variable

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> TABLE(tablenanme, TABLELENGTH)
>
> </div>

### FILL_KNOB

The `FILL_KNOB` command fills a row of a table with the variation (multiplied by scaling factor) of all declared column variables of the table when the knob value change by 1.

> 

The `FILL` command takes two arguments:

is the name of the table to be filled. The table must have been [created](#sec:create) beforehand.

is the row number to be filled with the current values of all column variables.\
`ROW=0`, or `ROW=nrow + 1`, where `nrow` is the current number of rows in the table, causes `FILL` to add a row at the end of the table and fill it with the current values of all column variables.\
(Default: 0)

the name of the variable that is varied to calculate the values to fill a table.

scaling factor applied to all the variation calculated by varying the knob.

### SHRINK

The `SHRINK` command removes a number of rows at the end of a table.

> 

The `SHRINK` command takes two arguments:

is the name of the table from which rows should be removed. The table must have been previously [created](#sec:create) and [filled](#sec:fill) or read from file with [`READTABLE`](#sec:readtable).

is the number of the last row to be kept in the table. All rows beyond the given row number are removed.\
Negative values are allowed and count the row numbers from the last row, allowing access to the table in reverse order of rows: `ROW = -1` removes the last row of the table, `ROW = -2` removes the last two rows of the table, etc…\
(Default: -1)

Trying to access the table forward beyond the last row, i.e. `ROW` strictly greater than `nrow`, where `nrow` is the number of rows in the table, or trying to access the table backwards before the first row, *i.e.* `ROW` strictly lower than `-nrow`, both result in a “row out of bound” message and no values are filled in the table.
