# Control
## Beam Handling Statements

Many commands in `MAD-X` require the prior setting of various quantities related to the beam in the machine. Therefore, `MAD-X` will stop with a fatal error if an attempt is made to expand ([`USE`](#sec:use)) a sequence for which no `BEAM` command has been issued before.

### BEAM

The quantities are entered by a `BEAM` command:

> 

The attributes of the `BEAM` command are:

The name of particles in the beam. Default=`POSITRON`\
`MAD-X` knows the restmass and the charge for the following particles:

The particles are positrons (`MASS=`$`m_e`$`, CHARGE=1`)

The particles are electrons (`MASS=`$`m_e`$`, CHARGE=-1`)

The particles are protons (`MASS=`$`m_p`$`, CHARGE=1`)

The particles are anti-protons (`MASS=`$`m_p`$`, CHARGE=-1`)

The particles are positive muons (`MASS=`$`m_{\mu}`$`, CHARGE=1`)

The particles are negative muons (`MASS=`$`m_{\mu}`$`, CHARGE=-1`)

The particles are simple generic ions (`MASS=`$`u`$`, CHARGE=1`)

the restmass of the particles in the beam in GeV.\
(Default=$`m_e \approx 0.511\ 10^{-3}`$ GeV).\
Note that a zero mass particle is not allowed in `MAD-X`.

<span id="beam_charge" label="beam_charge"></span> the electrical charge of the particles in the beam in units of $`q_p`$, the proton charge. (Default=1)\
Note that a zero charge particle is not allowed in `MAD-X`. The order of precedence for arguments is: `particle->(mass+charge)`\
If the particle name given is recognized in the list above, the restmass and charge are set directly by `MAD-X`, and the `MASS` and `CHARGE` arguments provided in the `BEAM` command are simply ignored. For other particles, and in particular for ions, any combination of name, mass and charge can be entered independently.\

<span id="beam_energy" label="beam_energy"></span> Total energy per particle in GeV.\
If given, it must be greater than the particle restmass. (Default=1 GeV)

Particle momentum times the speed of light, in GeV.\
If given, it must be greater than zero.

Relativistic factor, *i.e.* ratio between total energy and rest energy of the particles: `GAMMA = ENERGY/MASS =` $`E / m_0 c^2`$.\
`GAMMA` must be greater than one.

Ratio between the speed of the particle and the speed of light: `BETA`$`= v / c`$.\
`BETA` must be strictly less than one.

Magnetic rigidity of the particles in T.m.\
`BRHO`$`= P / abs(q)`$ `= PC / ( abs(CHARGE) * c * 1.e-9)`. The order of precedence for arguments is: `energy->pc->gamma->beta->brho`

Note that if the restmass is changed after the energy has been set, ie in separate `BEAM` commands, the energy is left unchanged and the momentum `PC` and relativistic factor `GAMMA` are recalculated.\

The horizontal emittance $`\epsilon_x`$ (default: 1 m).

The vertical emittance $`\epsilon_y`$ (default: 1 m).

The longitudinal emittance $`\epsilon_t`$ (default: 1 m).

The normalised horizontal emittance \[m\]: $`\epsilon_{xn} = \sqrt{\gamma^2 - 1} \ \epsilon_x =  \beta \gamma\ \epsilon_x`$

The normalised vertical emittance \[m\]: $`\epsilon_{yn} = \sqrt{\gamma^2 - 1} \ \epsilon_y = \beta \gamma\ \epsilon_y`$

The bunch length $`c\ \sigma_t`$ in \[m\].

The *relative* energy spread $`\sigma_E / E`$ in \[1\].

The order of precedence for arguments is: `ex->exn`, `ey->eyn`.

The order of precedens for the logitudinal emittance is in the following order `ET->(SIGT and SIGE)`, `(SIGT and SIGE)->ET`, `(SIGT)->(ET and SIGE`, `(SIGE)->(ET and SIGT`. This means that if you define a `ET` this values will be used to override any value that you might have set for `SIGT and SIGE`.

Note that up to version 5.02.04 the definition of normalised emittance used in `MAD-X` was referring to the so-called 2-sigma geometric emittance: $`\epsilon_{n} = 4 \sqrt{\gamma^2 - 1} \ \epsilon = 4 \beta \gamma\ \epsilon`$ This definition was different from the definition usually found in literature and used for example in the [`APERTURE`](#chap:aperture) module.\
The standard one sigma definition is now used across all `MAD-X` modules.

Certain commands compute the synchrotron tune $`Q_s`$ taking into account the settings of RF cavities. If $`Q_s`$ is non-zero, the relative energy spread and the bunch length are calculated with
``` math
\begin{align}
    \sigma_E / p_0 c  &=  \sqrt{\epsilon_t\ \frac{2 \pi Q_s}{\eta\ C}} \\
          c\ \sigma_t &= \sqrt{\epsilon_t\ \frac{\eta\ C}{2 \pi Q_s}}
\end{align}
```
where $`C`$ is the machine circumference, and
``` math
\begin{equation}
  \eta = 1/\gamma^2 - 1/\gamma_t^2
\end{equation}
```

The number of particle bunches in the machine (default: 1).

<span id="beam_npart" label="beam_npart"></span> The number of particles per bunch (default: 0).

The bunch current (default: 0 A).

A logical flag. If set, the beam is treated as bunched whenever this makes sense.

<span id="beam_radiate" label="beam_radiate"></span> A logical flag. If set, synchrotron radiation is considered in all dipole magnets.

an integer specifying the direction of the particle movement in a beam line; either +1 (default), or -1. For a detailed explanation see the section below on bv flag.

attaches the defined beam to the named sequence; if the name is omitted, the BEAM command refers to the default beam which is always present. Sequences without attached beam use this default beam. When updating a beam with a corresponding sequence name, tye sequence name must always be mentioned.

**<u>Order and Precedence:</u>**\
Internally the BEAM command processes the parameters in the following order and with the following precedence (left to right):

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> particle -\> (mass+charge)\
> energy -\> pc -\> gamma -\> beta -\> brho\
> ex -\> exn\
> ey -\> eyn\
> current -\> npart
>
> </div>

**Warning:** BEAM updates, i.e. it replaces attributes explicitly mentioned, may calculate other attributes according to the precedence rules given, but does NOT return attributes not specified to default values! In order to reset to reset BEAM attributes to their default values, use the `RESBEAM` command.

**<u>Additional variables:</u>**\
Some `MAD-X` modules may also compute and store data into a beam data block. These attributes may NOT be set directly through the BEAM command. The corresponding variables are:

total length or circumference of the machine \[m\].

revolution frequency \[MHz\].

phase slip factor.

momentum deviation.

momentum compaction factor.

radiation loss per turn \[GeV\].

synchrotron tune \[1\].

classical particle radius \[m\].

damping partition numbers; Default is 1,1,2.

minimum available aperture, set by the APERTURE module.

### RESBEAM

The `RESBEAM` command resets the default values of the beam belonging to the specified sequence, or of the default beam if no sequence is given.

> 

The only argument to `RESBEAM` is a string for the sequence name. If the sequence name is omitted, the default beam is reset.

| **Attribute** | **Value**  | **Unit** |
|:--------------|:-----------|:---------|
| `PARTICLE`    | `POSITRON` |          |
| `ENERGY`      | 1          | GeV      |
| `EX`          | 1          | rad.m    |
| `EY`          | 1          | rad.m    |
| `ET`          | 1          | rad.m    |
| `KBUNCH`      | 1          |          |
| `NPART`       | 0          |          |
| `BCURRENT`    | 0          | A        |
| `BUNCHED`     | `TRUE`     |          |
| `RADIATE`     | `FALSE`    |          |

Default Beam Data

### Referring to BEAM data attributes

Expressions may refer to data in the beam data block using the notation

> 

or

> 

This notation refers to the value of attribute-name found in the default `BEAM`, respectively the beam belonging to the sequence `sequence-name`. This can be used for receiving or using values, e.g.

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> value, beam%lhcb2-\>bv;
>
> </div>

but also for storing values in the beam bank, e.g.

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> beam-\>charge=-1;
>
> </div>

Note however that this does NOT trigger an update of dependent variables and you are strongly advised against setting `BEAM` parameters with this method.

The current values in the `BEAM` bank can be obtained by the command

> 

or to obtain the data for a beam linked to a named sequence:

> 

**<u>Example:</u>**

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> ! select electrons, set energy and emittances\
> BEAM, PARTICLE=ELECTRON, ENERGY=50, EX=1.E-6, EY=1.E-8, SIGE=1.E-3;\
> ...\
> ! turn on synchrotron radiation\
> BEAM, RADIATE;\
> ...\
> ! reset all values to their defaults,\
> ! ie positrons, energy = 1GeV, default emittances, no radiation...\
> RESBEAM;\
> ...\
> ! select new emittances\
> BEAM, EX=2.E-5, EY=3.E-7, SIGE=4.E-3;
>
> </div>

### BV FLAG

When reversing the direction ($`\vec V`$) of a particle in a magnetic field ($`\vec B`$) while keeping its charge constant, the resulting force $`\vec
V \times \vec B`$ changes sign. This is equivalent to flipping the field, but not the direction.

For practical reasons the properties of all elements of the LHC are defined in the `MAD-X` input as if they apply to a clockwise proton beam ("LHC beam 1"). This allows a single definition for elements traversed by both beams. Their effects on a beam with identical particle charge but running in the opposite direction ("LHC beam 2") must then be reversed inside the program.

In `MAD-X` this may be taken into account by setting the value of the BV attribute in the `BEAM` commands. In the case of LHC beam 1 (clockwise) and beam 2 (counter-clockwise), that are both treated in `MAD-X` as clockwise proton beams, the `BEAM` commands must look as follows:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> BEAM, SEQUENCE=lhcb1, PARTICLE=proton, PC=450, BV = +1;\
> \
> BEAM, SEQUENCE=lhcb2, PARTICLE=proton, PC=450, BV = -1;
>
> </div>
