# Control
## Sequence Editor

With the help of a few commands, an existing sequence may be modified in many ways: in the case of a circular machine, the starting point of the sequence can be moved to another place; the order of elements can be inverted; elements can be inserted one by one, or as a whole group with one single command; single elements, or classes thereof can be removed; elements can be replaced by others; finally, the sequence can be "flattened", i.e. all inserted sequences are replaced by their actual elements, such that a flattened sequence contains only elements.

It is good practice to add a [`FLATTEN`](#sec:flatten) statement at the end of a `SEQEDIT` operation to ensure a fully operational sequence. This is particularly useful for the [`SAVE`](#sec:save) command to properly save *shared sequences* and to write them out in `MAD-8` format.

### SEQEDIT

`MAD-X` provides an environment for the edition of sequences that is invoked with the command:

> 

The only attribute is the name of the sequence to be edited.

The editing is performed on the sequence as provided by the user and before it is expanded with the [`USE`](#sec:use) command. At the end of sequence edition, the resulting sequence must be expanded through the [`USE`](#sec:use) command as necessary.

### FLATTEN

Sequences can be built from elements but also sub-sequences resulting in a nested structure (see chapter <a href="#chap:sequence" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="chap:sequence">5</a> on sequence definition). The positioning of elements within a sequence can also be specified with values or expressions, and by reference to other elements.

`MAD-X` provides a command to resolve these dependencies and transform a complex sequence into a simple list of elements with positioning values referring to the start of the sequence, discarding the user-specified expressions for the positioning.

This command takes no argument:

> 

If the sequence being edited contains sub-sequences, `FLATTEN` recursively includes all sub-sequences until the sequence is only composed of a simple list of elements.

`FLATTEN` also resolves the positioning of each element within the sequence to a single value with reference to the start of the sequence and updates the `AT` attribute of that element while also discarding the user-specified expression if present.

The `FLATTEN` command is recommended at the beginning of sequence edition as well as at the very end as in

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> SEQEDIT, S̄EQUENCE=name;\
> FLATTEN;\
> …commands to edit the named sequence…\
> FLATTEN;\
> ENDEDIT;
>
> </div>

### CYCLE

> 

This makes the sequence start at the location given as attribute value of the `START` attribute. The element named by the `START` attribute must be a marker.\
In case there is a shared sequence in the used sequence, the command `FLATTEN` should be used before the command `CYCLE`.\
Example:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> FLATTEN;\
> CYCLE, START=place;
>
> </div>

Note that the `FLATTEN` command inserts another marker before the start location, with a name composed of the name of the sequence being edited, followed by the start location name and the string "\_P\_".

### REFLECT

> 

This inverts the order of element in the sequence, starting from the last element.\
If there are shared sequences inside the [`USE`](#sec:use)d sequence, the command `FLATTEN` must be used before the command `REFLECT`. Alternatively each shared sequence must first be reflected. Example:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> FLATTEN;\
> REFLECT;
>
> </div>

### INSTALL

> 

where the parameters have the following meaning:

name of the (new) element to be inserted (mandatory)

class of the new element to be inserted (mandatory)

position where the element is to be inserted; if no "from" is given,this is relative to the start of the sequence. If "from" is given, it is relative to the position specified there.

either a place (i.e. the name(+occurrence count) of an element already existing in the sequence, e.g. mb\[15\], or mq.a..i1..4 etc.; or the string `SELECTED`; in the latter case an element of the type specified will be inserted behind all elements in the sequence that are currently selected by one or several [`SELECT`](#sec:select) commands of the type

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> SELECT, FLAG=seqedit, CLASS=.., PATTERN=.., RANGE=..;
>
> </div>

**Note:** No element definition can occur inside a `SEQEDIT ... ENDEDIT` block.

### MOVE

> 

name of the existing element to be moved, or "SELECTED", in which case all elements from existing [`SELECT`](#sec:select) commands will be moved; in the latter case, the `BY` attribute must be given.

distance by which the element(s) is/are to be moved; no `TO` or `FROM` attributes should be given in this case.

position to which the element has to be moved; if no `FROM` attribute is given, the position is relative to the start of the sequence; otherwise, it is relative to the location given in the `FROM` argument

place in the sequence with respect to which the element is to be positioned.

### REMOVE

> 

name of existing element(s) to be removed.\
The special case `ELEMENT = SELECTED` removes all elements previously selected by [`SELECT`](#sec:select) commands

**Note:** `MAD-X` expects to find some special markers in a beam line and it is therefore dangerous to remove all markers from a sequence! In particular the `START=...` marker and markers added by a [`CYCLE`](#sec:cycle) command must never be removed from a sequence.

### REPLACE

> 

The parameters are defined as:

names the elements to be replaced.\
The special case `ELEMENT = SELECTED` replaces all elements previously selected by [`SELECT`](#sec:select) commands

names the elements replacing the elements selected for replacement.

### EXTRACT

A new sequence can be extracted as a subset of an existing sequence. The extracted sequence is given a new name and can be [`USE`](#sec:use)d as any user defined sequence.

> 

The parameters are defined as:

the name of the existing sequence from which the new sequence is extracted.

the name of an element in the sequence that becomes the first element of the extracted sequence.

the name of an element in the sequence that becomes the last element of the extracted sequence.

the name of the extracted sequence.

The extracted sequence is declared as [`SHARE`](#chap:sequence)d and can therefore be combined *e.g.* into the cycled original sequence.

**Note:** the element given by the `FROM` attribute must be located, in the existing sequence, before the element given by the `TO` attribute, or `MAD-X` fails with a fatal error. In the case of circular sequences, this can be ensured by performing a [`CYCLE`](#sec:cycle) of the original sequence with `START` pointing to the same element given in the `FROM` attribute of the `EXTRACT` command.

### ENDEDIT

The sequence editing environment is closed with the command

> 

The nodes in the sequence are finally renumbered according to their occurrence which might have changed during editing.

### SAVE

The `SAVE` command saves a sequence to a specified file together with all relevant information.

> 

The parameters are defined as:

lists the sequences to be saved, separated by commas. This attribute is optional and when omitted, all known sequences are saved.\
However, because of internal inconsistencies that can result in spurious entries in the output file, the user is strongly advised to always provide explicitly the names of sequences to be saved.

the filename of the output file. (Default: "save")

an optional flag to specify that all beams linked to the specified sequences are saved at the top of the output file.

an optional flag to save only the sequence without the element definitions nor beam information. This allows to re-read in a sequence with might otherwise create a stop of the program. This is particularly useful to turn a line into a sequence in order to further edit it with [`SEQEDIT`](#sec:seqedit).

an optional flag to request that the sequences should be saved using `MAD-8` input format.

an optional flag to save values of expressions instead of the expressions themselves: the expressions in commands and variables are expanded and evaluated before saving. This option must be used with care because the exported values were not deeply checked and the code that writes variables and commands is widely spread in the internal structure.\
This option does not apply only for the saving of sequences in `MAD-8` format.

provides a name for the saved sequence, overriding the original name. (see [`EXTRACT`](#sec:extract) above)

Any number of `SELECT, FLAG=save, ...` commands may precede the `SAVE` command. In that case, the names of elements, variables, and sequences must match the pattern(s) if given, and in addition the elements must be of the class(es) specified.

The precision of the output of the `SAVE` command depends on the defined output precision for `MAD-X`, which can be adjusted with the [`SET, FORMAT...`](#sec:set) command.

Note that with `BARE=false` the saved sequence may contain redundant efinitions of elements, *i.e.* the same element is defined in the declaration of elements in the form `label: type...` and in the sequence itself in the form `label: type, at=...`. This is flagged by `MAD-X` as implicit element redefinition and is ignored but a warning is issued.

Example:

    tl3: LINE = ( ldl6, qtl301, mqn, qtl301, ldl7, qtl302,
                                mqn, qtl302, ldl8, ison);
    dltl3: LINE=(delay, tl3);

    Use, period=dltl3;

    Save, sequence=dltl3, file=t1, bare; // only sequence is saved

    Call, file=t1; // sequence is read in and is now a "real" sequence
    // if the two preceding lines are suppressed, seqedit will print a warning
    // and else do nothing

    Use, period=dltl3;

    Twiss, save, betx=bxa, alfx=alfxa, bety=bya, alfy=alfya;

    Plot, vaxis=betx, bety, haxis=s, colour:=100;

    SEQEDIT, SEQUENCE=dltl3;
      remove,element=cx.bhe0330;
      remove,element=cd.bhe0330;
    ENDEDIT;

    Use, period=dltl3;
    Twiss, save, betx=bxa, alfx=alfxa, bety=bya, alfy=alfya;

### DUMPSEQU

> 

This command is actually more of a debug statement, but it may come handy at certain occasions. The argument of the `SEQUENCE` attribute is the name of an already expanded (i.e. [`USE`](#sec:use)d) sequence. The amount of detail in the output is controlled by the `LEVEL` argument:

- print only the cumulative node length = sequence length

- print all node (element) names except drifts

- print all nodes with their attached parameters

- print all nodes, and their elements with all parameters
