## 3.10 GDF2SDDS

```
gdf2sdds [-hHva] [-o outfile] infile [arrays ...]
```
Converts a GDF file to the SDDS format.

- **`-h`** — Give short help and quit.

- **`-H`** — Give long help and quit.

- **`-v`** — Verbose mode, instructs the program to write additional information during processing.

- **`-a`** — Writes an ASCII SDDS file. When not specified, a binary file is written. Before use, please see the note below about precision.

- **`-o outfile`** — Write output to a file named `outfile`. If not specified, output is written to `stdout`.

- **`infile`** — Filename of the GDF file to convert to ASCII. If not specified, the program reads the GDF file from `stdin`. To read from `stdin` when `arrays` are specified, a dash (‘`-`’) must be specified.

- **`arrays`** — The names of the arrays/parameters to convert. If not specified, all GDF information is converted to the SDDS format.

This program converts a GDF file to a file in the Self Describing Data Set (SDDS) format [5]. The SDDS format is supported by a toolkit consisting of a number of powerful and efficient programs for analyzing, manipulating and plotting SDDS data. The SDDS toolkit can be downloaded free of charge from Argonne National Laboratory.

The GDF2SDDS program writes GDF arrays as column data in SDDS format. Single values in GDF are converted to parameters in SDDS. When one or more `arrays` are specified, only the selected arrays are written to SDDS. GDF group names such as time, position and the values of one or more scanned parameters are always written to SDDS. As dictated by the SDDS column format, all specified arrays must have equal length.

To convert the x-, y- and z-coordinates in the GDF file `test.gdf` to the SDDS file `test.sdds`, the following command can be used:

```
gdf2sdds –o test.sdds test.gdf x y z

```
Because GDF2SDDS writes to `stdout` when no output filename is given, it can be piped before any command that reads an SDDS file from `stdin`. This allows efficient use of the `–pipe=in` option of many of the SDDS toolkit programs, as demonstrated in the following example:

```
gdf2sdds test.gdf | sddsquery –pipe=in

```
Note: The `–a` option writes an ASCII SDDS file. To reduce the size of the outputfile, double-precision floating-point numbers are written with only 8 digits precision. Because this causes loss of precision, it is recommended not to use this option except for diagnostic purposes.
