## 3.11 GDF2VTP

```
gdf2vtp [-hHv] [-m] [-i index] [-o outfile] infile [arrays...]
```
Converts a GDF-file to ParaView format

```
-h
```
Give short help and quit.

```
-H
```
Give long help and quit.

```
-v
```
Verbose mode. Instructs the program to write additional information during every stage of the conversion process.

```
-m
```
Force multi-page `outfile.pvd` file to be written, also for single-group input.

```
-i index
```
Group the files in `outfile.pvd` by specified `index`. Default `time`.

```
-o outfile
```
Write output to a file named `outfile.vtr` for rectilinear grids, `outfile.vtp` for point data, and `outfile.pvd` for group information.

```
infile
```
Filename of the GDF-file to convert to ParaView format. A dash ("`-`") can be specified to read from `stdin`.

```
arrays
```
The names of the arrays to be written to `outfile`. If not specified, all arrays are written.

This program converts a multi-group GDF-file to a sequence of ParaView files. When `infile` contains a GPT phase-phase distribution, the output will be point-data containing the particle phase-space coordinates. When the input is an axis-aligned grid containing field-information, the output will be a rectilinear grid that can be sliced in ParaView. The program automatically distinguishes between these different modes of operation, and it automatically assigns the correct extension to outfile: `.vtp` for point-data and `.vtr` for rectilinear (field) grids. When the input has multiple GDF-groups, the output is a sequence of files numbered from `1` to `N` and a separate collection file named `outfile.pvd` is written that contains the pointers to the individual files.

Because ParaView format is meant for 3D visualization, *xyz*-data must be present. It is currently not possible to convert for example the output of GDFA. Default all arrays present in the GDF file are converted to ParaView format. This can be limited using the `arrays` option by specifying the list of arrays that need to be stored.

Many GDF-files contain separate groups containing for example multiple time outputs or as a result of a parameter scan. Such multi-group files are converted to a sequence of files named `outfile.N.vtp` for point-data and `outfile.N.vtr` for rectilinear grids. In addition, a separate `outfile.pvd` file is written referencing these individual files and providing collection information to ParaView. Although the numbered files can be opened by ParaView, the typical procedure is to open the `.pvd` file instead because this allows you to conveniently cycle back and forth through the multi-group results.

In a workflow where sometimes single-group and sometimes multi-group output is generated, we strongly advice the use of the `-m` option and always work with the `.pvd` file. This is because when switching from multi-group to single-group output, the old numbered files will not be deleted from disk. Consequently, it is very easy to mistakenly open a file that was produced by a previous or maybe even older simulation. This issue is solved by working with the `.pvd` since it will always contain the correct collection, where sometimes this happens to be a collection of 1. In terms of performance there is no penalty for working with the collection since `.pvd` files are tiny because they do not contain any simulation data.

Vector data in the GDF file is automatically converted to a single array. For example, the magnetic field arrays named `fBx`, `fBy` and `fBz` in the GDF inputfile will be stored as a single vector array named `fB`. If individual arrays are specified using the `array` specification, and if this list does not list all vector components, the conversion to vector form does not take place.

One remaining issue converting multi-group files is that the `.pvd` collection file format only supports “`timestep`” as running variable. This potentially conflicts with the GDF format where it is possible to have scans with some other variable changing from group to group. For a sequence of time-outputs, the `timestep` in the `.pvd` file is set to the GPT simulation `time`. In all other cases, `timestep` in the `.vtp` file is simply set to an integer matching the number of the referenced outputfile instead. The latter behavior can be overwritten using the `-i index` option, where you can for example specify that the output of a scan over `phase` should be converted such that `phase` in GPT becomes `timestep` in ParaView. Running with the `-v` option gives hints and suggestions in confusing cases.

Group information is also converted to ParaView format in the form of so-called `<FieldData>`. This information is visible in ParaView alongside the `<PointData>`, and it can be shown in Render View using the `AnnotaAttributeData` filter.

A few examples of how to use GDF2VTP are listed in Table 3-D shown below. Table 3-D: Example use of GDF2VTP. Command: Comments:

```
gpt -o outfile.gdf infile.in
gdf2vtp -o outfile.vtp outfile.gdf

```
where `infile.in` contains:

```
tout(1e-9);
```
Writes `outfile.vtp` containing the phase-space coordinates of all particles at t=10–9. Idem, where `infile.in` contains:

```
tout(0,10e-9,1e-9);
```
Writes `outfile.1.vtp`…`outfile.11.vtp` containing phase-space coordinates of all particles at the specified times. Also writes the collection file `outfile.pvd` where timestep lists the correct simulation time. Idem, where `infile.in` contains:

```
screen(10e-3,20e-3,1e-3);
```
Writes `outfile.1.vtp`…`outfile.11.vtp` containing phase-space coordinates of all particles at the specified positions. Also writes the collection file `outfile.pvd` where timestep just runs from 1 to 11.

```
gpt -o outfile.gdf infile.in
gdf2vtp -i position -o outfile.vtp
  outfile.gdf

```
where `infile.in` contains:

```
screen(10e-3,20e-3,1e-3);
```
Schizophrenic mode where position in GPT is shown as time in Paraview.

```
gpt -o outfile.gdf infile.in
gdf2vtp -o outfile.vtp outfile.gdf

```
where `infile.in` contains:

```
setstartxyzgrid(...);
tout(0);
```
Writes `outfile.vtr` containing a rectilinear grid of field-data. The position and spacing where the fields are sampled is given by the parameters of

```
setstartxyzgrid(“set”,Lx,dx,Ly,dy,Lz,dz)
```
where `L` and `d` specify the length and spacing respectively in the *xyz*-directions. Not all dimension need to have thickness, and for example a slice in the *zx*-plane can be specified bysetting `Ly`=`dy`=0. Idem, where `infile.in` contains:

```
q=0.0;
setstartxyzgrid(“set”,...);
settransform(“wcs”,”ox,oy,oz”,1,0,0,
0,1,0, “set) ;
tout(0,10e-9,1e-9);
```
Here we position stationary particles with zero charge so that the observer grid itself is not being tracked during the multiple-time output. Furthermore, the field-data is centered around the point `ox`,`oy`,`oz`.
