## 3.13 GDFFLATTEN

```
gdfflatten [-hHg] [–o outfile] group_by infile.gdf
```
Removes one level from the hierarchical structure of a GDF file by combining the results.

```
-o outfile
```
Write output to a file named `outfile`

```
-a outfile
```
Append output to a file named `outfile`

```
-h
```
Give short help and quit.

```
-H
```
Give long help and quit.

```
-g
```
Write group information as seperate column.

```
-v
```
Verbose mode. Display iteration output containing all variables and constraints.

```
group_by
```
Group to be removed during flattening.` `

```
infile.gdf
```
File to be flattened` `

GDFFLATTEN changes the hierarchical structure of a GDF file by concatenating data from several groups. The data itself is hereby not changed. GDFFLATEN eliminates the `group_by` group of the inputfile while maintaining the rest of the hierarchical structure. This is done by rearranging the data such that all data is grouped together without taking into account the `group_by` level in the hierarchy.

When the `-g` option is specified, GDFFLATTEN runs in lossless mode by writing the `group_by` variable as a separate column to the outputfile.

One possible use of GDFFLATTEN is to obtain better statistics by combining the results of several GPT runs where each run is launched with a different seed for the random number generator. In that case, the MR program is used to launch N different runs, with N different seeds. Although this works great with the MPI version of MR on a cluster with N nodes, the resulting outputfile is difficult to analyze because it contains “seed” as outermost group in the hierarchy. Flattening on “seed” solves this issue because it will produce a file as if N times more particles had been tracked. Such a file is much easier to post-process with the standard tools such as GDFA.
