## 3.14 GDFMGO

```
gdfmgo [-hHvk] -j nCPU [–o outfile] infile.sol program [parameters]
```
or

```
mpirun [options] gdfmgo [-hHvk] –o [outfile] infile.sol program [-j 1]
[parameters]

```
Multi-objective genetic global optimizer for the specified program.

```
-o outfile
```
Write output to a file named `outfile`

```
-a outfile
```
Append output to a file named `outfile`

```
-h
```
Give short help and quit.

```
-H
```
Give long help and quit.

```
-v
```
Verbose mode. Display iteration output containing all variables and constraints.

```
-j nCPU
```
Run simultaneously over `nCPU` processors in a multi-processor system. When not specified, all cores in the system are used. The MPI version uses the `[options]` of `mpiexec` to allocate computational resources and the `-j` option is ignored.

```
-s initial
```
Read the initial population from the file `initial` instead of generating a random distribution. This file can be the output of a previous GDFMGO run.

```
-k
```
Keep all datapoints in the initial distribution, even if the population size is smaller.

```
-r
```
Do not delete raw outputfiles.

```
-f path
```
Store raw simulation results in `path`. `-g executable` Use the given `executable` for data analysis. Default GDFA.

```
infile.sol
```
Name of the file containing information about the parameters that are to be varied and the constraints to be met. See Table 3-I for specific sections in this file.

```
mpiexec [options]
```
Use `mpiexec` to launch multiple instances of `program` in parallel.

```
program [parameters]
```
Command line of a program that creates a GDF file and recognizes the `-o` option, for example `GPT`.

GDFMGO is a multi-objective genetic global optimizer that is applicable to a wide range of optimization problems. Its main use is to estimate the optimal trade-off between conflicting objectives, such as large current and low emittance, while adjusting all free variables. It approximates this optimal trade-off, better known as the pareto front, by genetically optimizing a population of samples across all their variables. This is a CPU intensive method, but very stable and relatively insensitive to simulation noise. An MPI version is available to run GDFMGO on clusters and supercomputers. Information about the internal algorithms of GDFMGO can be found in section 1.12.3. One dimensional optimization problems are sometimes better suited for GDFSOLVE, described in section 0.

GDFMGO is a load-balanced optimizer: Different runs can use a different amount of CPU time to complete without degrading performance. However care should be taken that the program to run does not spawn new threads in an attempt to increase calculation speed. This will work counter-productively in almost all cases because the course-grain multithreading by GDFMGO will typically outperform fine-grain multithreading of the program. We have seen cases where the performance dropped by over a factor of 10. Consequently, when GDFMGO is used in combination with MR and/or GPT we strongly recommend including `–j 1` in the commandline options for these programs. This yields:

```
gdfmgo –o output.gdf infile.sol mr –j 1 scan.mr gpt –j 1 input.in
```
or the same with `mpirun [options]` prepended for the MPI version.

It is possible to continue the optimization of a previous GDFMGO run, or start with a custom dataset, using the `–s` option. This option is rather forgiving in terms of the amount of data provided: Neither the columns nor the length of the dataset is critical. This makes it possible to continue a previous run, but with one or more variables added. In that case, the initial population is based on the provided data with the newly added variables randomly initialized. If the initial dataset is larger than the population size, the dataset is truncated based on the values in the column mgorank. The `–k` option can be used to force the first generation to use the entire dataset, even if it is larger than the population size. A smaller dataset than population size is appended with random points. The GDFSELECT program can be used to start from a specific generation of a previous run.

The variables and objectives for GDFMGO are read from `infile.sol` file, or any other filename you provide on the command line. It is an ASCII file that must contain all section listed in Table 3-E. A sample `.mgo` file is shown in Listing 3-2. Table 3-E: Sections in the `.mgo `file and a GDFMGO output description Section Section Description

```
[OPTIONS]
```
3.14.1 Sets various options and constants directly related to the algorithm.

```
[VARIABLES]
```
3.14.2 Defines the variables to be varied.

```
[OPTIMIZE]
```
3.14.3 Defines the constraints to be minimized or maximized.

3.14.4 Output description of GDFMGO

**Listing 3-1:** Sample .mgo file for GDFMGO.

```
# Minimize stdx and maximize stdG by varying Isol1 and Isol2.

[OPTIONS]
populationsize = 50 ;
# Increase default population size to 50
generations = 50 ;
# Decrease default maximum number of generations to 50
ignoreerrors = 1 ;
# Interpret errors as bad objectives

[VARIABLES]
Isol.min = 0 ;

# Variable Isol must be positive
Isol.max = 1000 ;

# with max value 1 kA
Isol2.min = 0 ;

```
```
# Same for Isol2
Isol2.max = 1000 ;

#
Isol2.startmin = 500 ;

# But we start in the range [500-1000]
```

[OPTIMIZE]
stdx.position = 1 ;

```
# Minimize stdx at z=1 m, requires screen at z=1 m
stdx.log = 1 ;

# where log(stdx) is what matters
stdG.weight = -1 ;

```
```
# Maximize stdG
stdG.position = 1 ;

# also at z=1 m

### 3.14.1 Options

```
In the [OPTIONS] section, the following options can be set. The syntax is shown in Table 3-F. Table 3-F: Options syntax. Syntax Required Default Description

```
[OPTIONS]
```
No

Start of options section.

```
ignoreerrors
```
No If set to 1, all error codes are equivalent to an infinitely bad simulation result. The optimization continues and in most cases this works surprisingly well.

```
populationsize
```
No Calculated Total size of the population

```
generations
```
No Maximum number of generations

```
minfronts
```
No Minimum number of fronts

```
minviolatoins
```
No

Stop when all candidate solutions have less than the given number of constraint violations.

```
scalefactor
```
No 0.6 See description in section 1.12.3.1

```
mutationrate
```
No 0.9 See description in section 1.12.3.1

```
dynamicminmax
```
No See description in section 1.12.3.3 and 3.14.3. Value 1 turns dynamicminmax on.

```
defaulttime
```
No

Default time for all objectives

```
defaultposition
```
No

Default position for all objectives

```
printGDFAwarnings
```
No Print warnings for unsuccessful GDFA progs.

The optimization process is terminated when either the maximum number of generations or the minimum number of fronts is reached.

If not specified, the populationsize is calculated as 10∙*N*v∙(1+*N*o), with *N*v the number of variables and *N*o the number of objectives. In many cases this is a rather safe setting and the same solution can be reached more efficiently by reducing the population size.

This `minviolations` option can be used to bootstrap the optimisation with quick-and-dirty simulations that focus on getting all variables into the correct range. It is particularly effective when many of the initial runs give very poor results or don’t run to completion at all. The rationale using this option is that in most cases the initial variables are so far off that the first runs are not an optimisation, but elimination of variable space. As long as not all constraints are met almost all evolutionary pressure is applied into the direction of getting all variables into acceptable range. This process does not require very precise simulations: It makes no sense to calculate one run with very high precision when it is internally compared to a run that fails to be within any of the constraints. This option allows elimination of variable space using less-precise simulations (no space charge, few hundred particles, low accuracy), optionally with a rather large population size in order to not miss any of the solutions. The final population can be fed into a subsequent highprecision run using the `-s` option of the optimiser. As a generalisation it is possible to specify a value different from 1. In that case the optimisation process stops when all candidate solutions have less than N constraint violations.

### 3.14.2 Variables

The [VARIABLES] section defines all variables to be varied. The syntax is shown in Table 3-G. In case an estimate for the optimal values is already known, these can be specified with `startmin` and `startmax` separately from the obligatory `min` and `max` values. Table 3-G: Variable syntax. Syntax Required Description

```
[VARIABLES]
```
Yes Start of variables section.

```
var.min = min ;
```
Yes Set the lower bound for variable `var` to `min`.

```
var.max = max ;
```
Yes Set the upper bound for variable `var` to `max`.

```
var.startmin = min ;
```
No Set the lower bound of the initial population to `min`.

```
var.startmax = max ;
```
No Set the upper bound of the initial population to `max`.

```
var.log = l ;
```
No A value of `1` indicates that the initial sampling of this variable is linear on a logarithmic scale. A value of `-1` must be used when all values, i.e. min and max, are negative.

```
var.cyclic = 1
```
No Informs the optimizer that the given `var` is cyclic.

The usual Differential Evolution (DE) algorithm does not work well for cyclic variables such as rf-phases because candidate solutions near the outer edges of the variable range cannot be successfully combined with the usual equations. The reason is as follows: If we omit crossover from the discussion, a new candidate *x* is formed from *u*, *v* and *w* using: *x* = *w* + *s* (*u*-*v*) where *s* is a scale factor to enforce convergence. If *u* and *v* are at the outer edges of the min-max range, the actual difference is almost zero when cyclicity is taken into account. However, with the above equation it is the full-range multiplied by *s* that is added to *w*, instead of almost zero. This results in two sub-populations being formed near the min and max values of the variable range. Setting `cyclic` switches the internal algorithm to modulo (max-min) mathematics solving the problem.

Example: Add a variable `phi` that is cyclic in [0,2π].

```
[VARIABLES]
phi.min = 0 ;
phi.max = 6.28318530718 ;
phi.cyclic = 1 ;

### 3.14.3 Optimize

```
The [OPTIMIZE] section defines the objective(s) to be minimized/maximized and their boundaries. The syntax is shown in table Table 3-H. All objectives must hold either at a specific `position` or `time`, and this must correspond to a matching `screen` or `tout` line in the GPT inputfile. The sign of the `weight` determines if the objective must be minimized (default) or maximized. Objectives can have `min` and `max` values, and this takes precedence in the ranking procedure. Effectively this means that the optimizer will first try to find settings where all objectives are within their min/max values, and only then will it start the actual multi- objective optimization process.

Table 3-H: Optimize syntax. Syntax Required Description

```
[OPTIMIZE]
```
Yes Start of optimize section.

```
opt.time = t ;
```
One of Specify the time `t` when function `opt` must be minimized.

```
opt.position = p ;
```
these Specify the position `p` where constraint `opt` must be minimized.

```
opt.weight = m ;
```
No A weight of `1` instructs the optimizer to minimize this objective while a weight of `-1` maximizes this objective. Objectives with zero weight are ignored by the optimizer, but the value is written in the outpufile.

```
opt.log = l ;
```
No A value of `1` indicates that the optimal sampling of this objective along the pareto front is equidistant on a logarithmic scale. A value of `-1` must be used when all values are negative.

```
opt.min = min ;
```
No Objective must be larger than `min`.

```
opt.max = max ;
```
No Objective must be smaller than `max`.

Setting `weight=0` makes the objective irrelevant for the final ranking, but `min`/`max` values for the same objective can be used to filter out unwanted solutions. Furthermore, the constraint will be written in the outputfile for further analysis.

It is possible to have a variable also as objective. For example, if we want to know the tradeoff between the current through a small focusing solenoid and the achievable spotsize, than the current through the solenoid is both a variable (in the GPT inputfile) and an objective (lower current is better). To accomplish this, it is sufficient to repeat the name of the variable in the constraints section with the proper `weight` setting (`1` to minimize, `−1` to maximize). In that case the `min`/`max` values of the objective are automatically transferred to the variable.

The `min` and `max` constraints have priority in the ranking procedure to get the most selective pressure in the direction of satisfied constraints. Typically this yields an entire population within all constraints in the first few generations. However, priority ranking of the constraints can backfire if the entire population is outside the min/max boundaries in only one of the objectives. In that case, there is a lot of pressure to get all *other* objectives inside their min/max boundaries, but the objective that is the furthest off is virtually ignored. To compensate for this undesired side-effect, the `min`/`max` boundaries are in that case temporarily adjusted to span at least 25% of the population. This yields balanced selective pressure for all constraints, even if none of the population is within the constraints. This temporary adjustment of the boundaries can be switched off by setting `dynamicminmax=0` in the `[OPTIONS]` part of the inputfile.

If neither `time` or `position` is specified, the `defaulttime` or `defaultposition` is used instead. These can be set in the `[OPTIONS] `section of the inputfile.

### 3.14.4 Output

GDFMGO writes all variables and all objectives of the entire population to the outputfile in separate groups for each generation. The one group that is not labeled with a generation number is the final result, and this is the group that is plotted in GPTwin when opening the outputfile.

The rank of each member of the population and the number of constraint violations are written to the outputfile in the columns `mgorank` and `mgoviolations` respectively. All points closest to the Pareto front have rank zero, the adjacent points have rank one, and so on. It is instructive to make scatterplots color-coded on `mgorank` and/or `mgoviolations` to visually inspect the progress of the optimizer.

### 3.14.5 Technical notes

Not all runs of GDFMGO produce the exact same result, on the contrary. Even when starting from the exact same distribution, spawning different runs on different threads and/or CPUs results in an unpredictable ordering of the results coming in. This slightly randomizes the entire optimization process, potentially producing very different results after many generations. However, each GFDMGO will converge towards a uniformly sampled Pareto front.

It is often expected that with the `–s` option the results of the first generation are an exact copy of the initial data provided. However, because GDFMGO is a load-balanced optimizer, this is hardly ever the case for the following reason: When a few function evaluations, i.e. GPT runs, take a long time to complete, the first generation is reached before all datapoints in the initial dataset are evaluated. The first generation therefore contains the fastest to calculate variables in the initial dataset combined with a few newly created samples. If the initial dataset is a relatively good initial condition, this shows as a first generation that is very good except for a few strange outliers. The outliers disappear because the remaining datapoints of the initial set will be mixed in with the second, or maybe even later generations.

For performance reasons the constraints could also be read from file when the `–s` option is used to continue from a previous run. This however, is *not* done: The initial variables are read, but the objectives are always newly recalculated. The reason for this is that reading the results from file will be disastrous when in the meantime the GPT inputfile, MR setting or fieldmaps have been modified. Since reading the results from file saves the recalculation of just one generation we decided this is not worth the risk.

It is recommended to add `setrlimit("CPU",N,M);` to the GPT inputfile when running the optimizer on large clusters. The reason is that in practice there are always a few GPT runs in an unfortunate parameter regime that take forever to complete, if at all. These runs can be automatically cut with `setrlimit`, saving valuable resources. The above line instructs GPT to attempt not start a new timestep after `N` seconds of CPU time, whereas after `M` seconds the program is hard-terminated by the underlying operating system no matter what.

On large clusters it is sometimes difficult to set path environment variables. One of the approaches is to copy all executables into the same directory as the inputfiles, and use `./gpt` on the command line in combination with `–g ./gdfa`. For us it solved a problem, although we realize that there are much more elegant solutions available.
