## 3.15 GDFSELECT

```
gdfselect [-hHvkr] [–o outfile] infile.gdf groupname [value | begin end]
```
Select a specific group by fixed value or with a range of values from another GDF file.

- **`-o outfile`** — Write output to a file named `outfile`

- **`-a outfile`** — Append output to a file named `outfile`

- **`-h`** — Give short help and quit.

- **`-H`** — Give long help and quit.

- **`-v`** — Verbose mode.

- **`-k`** — Do not collapse hierarchy on single-value selection.

- **`-r`** — Reverse selection criteria.

- **`groupname`** — Name of the group to be selected.

- **`value`** — Select a single value.

- **`begin end`** — Select a range of values.

GDFselect can be used to create a GDF file containing a subset of the groups present in another GDF file. It can for example be used to select a subset of a GDF file for further processing, reduce file size by removing unneeded information, or prepare initial conditions for GDFMGO by selecting which generation of a previous run to start from. Selection is based on `groupname` that must either have the specified `value` or a value that falls in the `begin end` range, endpoints included. For example, to convert time output at 1 ns from a GPT simulation to ASCII, the following commands can be given (assuming GPT produces output at 1 ns by a `tout(1e-9)` line):

```
gdfselect -o output_1ns.gdf gpt_output.gdf time 1e-9
gdf2a -o output_1ns.txt output_1ns.gdf

```
Selecting a range between 1 and 5 ns is also possible:

```
gdfselect -o ouput_1to5ns.gdf gpt_output.gdf 1e-9 5e-9

```
Despite its name, `gdfselect` actually removes information when anywhere in the hierarchy the specified `groupname` is present with a value or range outside the given criteria. You essentially specify what to remove, not what to keep. This implies that all information remains where the given groupname is not present all. Consequently, specifying a range for time output, such as `time -1e100 +1e100` will *not* remove the position output from a GPT simulation result that contains both time and position output. However, specifying a bogus value for the position output will remove all position output while keeping all time output:

```
gdfselect -o time_output.gdf combined_output.gdf position -1e100

```
It is possible to run `gdfselect` iteratively on the output of `gdfselect`. This is useful when dealing with more complicated hierarchies created by the `mr` program, but also when selecting a subset of the time output from a simulation result that contains both time and position output.

When only a single `value` is specified, the entire group is removed from the hierarchy unless the `-k` option is specified. The selection criteria can be reversed using the `-r` option.
