## 3.18 MR

```
mr [-hHvn] [-j nCPU] [-o outfile] [-a outfile] mrfile gpt [–j 1] [options]
```
or

```
mpirun [options] mr [-hHvn] [-o outfile] [-a outfile] mrfile program [options]
```
Scan one or more parameters and concatenate the output in a single hierarchical file.

- **`-o outfile`** — Write output to a file named `outfile`.

- **`-a outfile`** — Append output to a file named `outfile`.

- **`-h`** — Give short help and quit.

- **`-H`** — Give long help and quit.

- **`-j nCPU`** — Run simultaneously over `nCPU` cores. If not specified, all cores in the system are used.

- **`-v`** — Verbose mode. Echo the commands to the terminal as they are run.

- **`-n`** — Display commands but do not actually run them.

- **`mrfile`** — Name of the file containing information about the parameter(s) that are to be set or varied. It must be an ASCII-file with one or more lines each with the following syntax:

- **`param value`** — or

```
param from to step

```
Lines beginning with `#` are ignored.

- **`program [options]`** — Command line of a program to be run that creates a GDF file.

When the effect of one parameter in a simulation is to be studied, MR can be used to automate this process. The steps needed to use MR are: • Give the parameter of interest a symbolic name in the inputfile instead of a value. For example the phase of a prebuncher could be named `phi`. • Create a MR file containing information about the varying parameter. It consists of lines with the name of the varying parameter followed by either a `value` or a `from to step` specification. For example the following columns are equivalent and they can all be used to scan `phi` in the range from 0.4 to 0.7.

```
phi 0.4
phi 0.4 0.7 0.1
phi 0.4 0.6 0.1
phi 0.5 phi 0.7
phi 0.6 phi 0.7

```
• Run MR using the syntax specified above. For example:

```
mr -o result.gdf phi.mr gpt inputfile.in
```
runs GPT with varying `phi`, where `phi.mr` is one of the files above and `inputfile.in` is a valid simulation inputfile containing `phi`.

MR can be used to efficiently group all parameters of interest into a single file. If, for example, not only `phi` is a parameter of interest, but also `len`, `amp` and `theta`, the following `scan.mr` file sets these additional parameters for varying `phi`.

```
# MR file for varying phi
phi 0.4 0.7 0.1

# Fixed len, amp and theta
len 10
amp 1
theta 5

```
Multidimensional scans are easily created by specifying a range of values for two (or more) parameters. To run the above scan for three different values of `len`, the following `scan.mr` file will start the required 12 runs.

```
# MR file for varying phi and len
phi 0.4 0.7 0.1
len 10
len 12
len 15

# Fixed amp and theta
amp 1
theta 5

```
In the case of multidimensional scans, the `group_by` parameter of the GDFA program can be used to create plots with any varying parameter along the horizontal (or vertical) axis. For example:

```
mr –o result.gdf scan.mr gpt infile.in
gdfa –o avgs_as_function_of_phi.gdf result.gdf phi …
gdfa –o avgs_as_function_of_len.gdf result.gdf len …

### 3.18.1 Multi-core / MPI usage

```
On a single system, MR runs as many parallel jobs as there are cores on the system. The MPI version of MR launches runs on different physical machines using `mpirun`. In both cases, the output of all jobs is stored in temporary files and subsequently concatenated into `outfile` in the correct order. Load balancing is achieved by initially feeding all cores/nodes one job and assigning new jobs when the previous run is finished. This allows different runs to use a different amount of CPU time to complete without degrading performance. However care should be taken that the running program does not spawn new threads in an attempt to increase calculation speed. This will work counter-productively in almost all cases because the course-grain multithreading by MR will typically outperform fine-grain multithreading of the running program. Consequently, when MR is used to run GPT and when the total number of MR runs far exceeds the number of cores/nodes we strongly recommend including `–j 1` in the GPT commandline. For example:

```
[mpirun –n N] mr –o result.gdf huge_scan.mr gpt –j 1 file.in

```
The MPI version of MR reserves the first node for communication, spawning new processes and concatenating the temporary outputfiles. As these tasks consume virtually no CPU time, one usually also wants to also run an extra simulation job on the first machine. For example, to run on `apple`, `pear` and `berry`, where each machine runs six copies of GPT in parallel, the following command may be used:

```
mpirun –hosts 3 apple 7 pear 6 berry 6 mr –o result.gdf scan.mr gpt –j 1
file.in

```
To be able to use the MPI version of MR all executables must be in the search path of all machines. On large clusters we found that this is often a nightmare with PATH environment variables. As a simple alternative, specifying full pathnames seems to work almost everywhere.
