## 3.19 RAW2GDF

```
raw2gdf [-hHved] [-o outfile] [-a outfile] infile arr1 fac1 [arr2 fac2] ...
```
Raw binary file to GDF converter.

- **`-h`** — Give short help and quit.

- **`-H`** — Give long help and quit.

- **`-v`** — Verbose mode. Progress and file statistics are shown.

```
-e
```
Convert endian format. This is typically needed when RAW2GDF is run on a non-intel Linux machine and `infile` was generated on a PC, or vice versa.

- **`-d`** — Specify when data is given in double-precision numbers.

- **`-o outfile`** — Write output to `outfile`.

- **`-a outfile`** — Append output to `outfile`.

- **`infile`** — Name of the binary file to be converted.

- **`arr1`** — Name of the array as it is to be specified in the outputfile.

- **`fac1`** — Multiplication factor for `arr1`. **…** Specify all arrays present in `infile` with their conversion factor.

RAW2GDF converts a binary file to a GDF file. The resulting GDF file can be read by the field map elements and all GPT utility programs capable of handling GDF files. For example, to test if the resulting file is correct GDF2A can be used.

RAW2GDF writes the columns in the outputfile specified by the `arr` parameters. These column names should be specified in all subsequent handling of the GDF file. To allow conversion to SI units, the arrays are multiplied by their corresponding multiplication factors: `fac`. A `fac` of `1` must be specified if the array is already in SI units. When `fac` is specified to be `0`, the corresponding column is not written in the outputfile.

When a raw data file is generated on a PC, but converted using RAW2GDF on a big-endian (typically a non- intel Linux) machine, the `-e` option must be specified. This is also the case when a raw data file generated on a big-endian machine must be converted on a PC. Because GDF files are machine independent, a GDF file from any Linux machine can be used without conversion on a PC and vice versa (if transferred in binary format).

Note: All arrays present in the binary file must be specified on the RAW2GDF commandline, whether they are relevant or not.
