## 3.1 Basics

A GDF file is a file containing binary data in a structured form. Basically, a GDF file consists of a general header followed by one or more data blocks. Every block has a name and contains data. Almost all native C/FORTRAN data types are supported. A simple GDF file is shown schematically in Figure 3-1.

```
General header
string
"This is a string"
number
value
1234e56
array
{1.1,2.1,3.1,4.1,5.1}
```
Figure 3-1: Simple GDF file Such a list of named blocks containing all kinds of data is impractical when the number of blocks becomes excessively large. Therefore the blocks are stored hierarchically.

As an example consider the output of the particle tracer GPT. It needs to store particle coordinates at different simulation times. The particle coordinates are stored as separate arrays containing the coordinates of the individual particles. Because the particle coordinates are calculated at different times, the blocks are grouped together by time. A (simplified) GPT outputfile is shown schematically in Figure 3-2.

```
General header
time

{x1,x2,x3,...} y
{y1,y2,y3,...} z
{z1,z2,z3,...} time

{x1,x2,x3,...} y
{y1,y2,y3,...} z
{z1,z2,z3,...}
```
Figure 3-2: GDF-output of the particle tracer GPT. Groups can be nested. Suppose, for example, that the coordinates of the particles are calculated at two times with a different value for the variable `var`. The GDF file can then be represented as shown in Figure 3-3.

```
General header
var time

particle coordinates time

particle coordinates
var time

particle coordinates time

particle coordinates
```
Figure 3-3: GDF-file containing nested groups. The MR program, see section 3.18, is used to create groups based on parameter scans, while the GDFA program, see section 3.12, is used to flatten the hierarchy by one level to ease interpretation of the results.
