## 3.2 ASCI2GDF

```
asci2gdf [-hHimv] [-c chars] [-s number] [-t topline] [-o outfile] [-a outfile]
  infile [arr1 fac1] ...
```
ASCII file to GDF converter.

```
-h
```
Give short help and quit.

```
-H
```
Give long help and quit.

```
-i
```
Ignore error lines and continue.

```
-m
```
Low memory mode reading all columns one at a time.

```
-v
```
Verbose mode. Progress and file statistics are shown.

```
-c chars
Ignore lines starting with any of `chars`. Default `"#;"`.

```
```
-s number
```
Skip the first `number` of lines.

```
-t columns
```
Lists the names of all `columns` in a file that contains the data only.

```
-o outfile
```
Write output to `outfile`.

```
-a outfile
```
Append output to `outfile`.

```
infile
```
ASCII file to be converted.

```
arr
```
Name of the array(s) as listed in `infile`, directly followed by their multiplication factor.

ASCI2GDF converts a tabulated ASCII file to a GDF file. The resulting GDF file can be read by the field map elements and by all GPT utility programs capable of handling GDF files. ASCI2GDF writes all columns that are present in `infile` in the `outfile`, except for columns with a specified multiplication factor `fac` of 0. Non-zero multiplication factors can be used to convert from non-SI units to SI units. When the original column is already in SI units, neither the name nor its multiplication factor need to be specified on the commandline. All lines starting with a hash mark `#` and all blank lines are ignored. To test if the resulting file is correct, the GDF2A program can be used.

The ASCII file to be converted must have the following structure:

```
# Comment section
name1  name2  name3  name4
data   data   data   data
data   data   data   data
…      …      …      …

```
The following commandline converts the above-listed file `sample.txt` to GDF:

```
asci2gdf -o sample.gdf sample.txt

```
The conversion can be verified with GDF2A. Without the `–o` option the output appears on the screen:

```
gdf2a sample.gdf

```
The following commandline instructs ASCI2GDF to multiply array `name2` by 100 and to omit `name4` in the resulting GDF file. Because `name1` and `name3` are not specified, they are converted to the outputfile with multiplication factor 1.

```
asci2gdf -o sample.gdf sample.txt name2 100 name4 0

```
Files with a non-conforming header, or files without header at all, can in many cases still be imported using the `–s` and `–t` options. The `–s` option skips the specified `number` of lines, whereas the –t option can be used to list the names of all the columns. They can be used in combination to overwrite the column names without modifying the file itself. The following example imports the above file importing the columns as `n1…n4` instead of `name1…name4`.

```
asci2gdf -o sample.gdf –s 1 –t "n1 n2 n3 n4" sample.txt

```
