## 3.3 ASTRA2GDF

```
astra2gdf [-hHv] [-o outfile] [-a outfile] [-s flag] infile
```
Convert ASTRA output to GDF format.

```
-h
```
Give short help and quit.

```
-H
```
Give long help and quit.

```
-v
```
Verbose mode. Progress and file statistics are shown.

```
-s flag
```
Import particles with given status `flag`.

```
-o outfile
```
Write output to `outfile`.

```
-a outfile
```
Append output to `outfile`.

```
infile
```
ASTRA file to be converted.

ASTRA2GDF converts the 10 column ascii ASTRA output to the binary GDF format. This GDF file can subsequently be read by `setfile` in a GPT inputfile to further track the particles. Only particles with ‘flag’is 5 are written to the outputfile. All other particles are silently ignored.

The following conversions take place: • The z-, pz- and time-coordinate of the first line are added to all other lines. • Time in [ns] is converted to time in [s]. • The momenta px,py and pz in [eV/s] are converted to dimensionless GBx,GBy,GBz where GBi=*p*i/*mc*. • The charge per macroparticle in [nC] is converted to dimensionless number of elementary particles. • The ASTRA particle ‘index’ is converted to two columns m [kg] and q [C] containing the mass and charge of the underlying elementary particles. This is implemented for index values 1=electrons, 2=positrons, 3=protons, and 4=hydrogen ions.

The following commandline converts the ASTRA outputfile file `TestRun.0031.001` to GDF:

```
astra2gdf -o TestRun.gdf TestRun.0031.001

```
The file can subsequently be used as initial paticle distribution in a GPT inputfile using:

```
setfile("beam","TestRun.gdf") ;
settdist("beam","u",0,0) ;

```
The reason for the last line is that ASTRA confusingly writes both time and position coordinates. Either one can be used, but care should be taken to not use both time and position coordinates simultaneously. If the output is used directly, `setfile` will assume an initial particle distribution with both time and position coordinates varying, and without warning the initial conditions will not correspond to the intended output of ASTRA. Because both GPT and ASTRA are time-domain tracking codes the most natural thing to do is having a varying position coordinate at a fixed time. We therefore use `settdist` to overwrite the time distribution to zero.

Only the ascii output variant of ASTRA is currently supported.
