## 3.5 FISHFILE

```
fishfile [-hHvr] [-o outfile] [-t tolerance] [-g GPTfile] [-y height]
  [-z offset] fishfile [scatfile.gdf]
```
Calculates ‘unrolled’ scatter statistics or creates a GPT inputfile based on a Superfish file.

```
-o outfile
```
Write output to a file named `outfile` containing the ‘unrolled’ scatter statistics and other useful information

```
-h
```
Give short help and quit.

```
-H
```
Give long help and quit.

```
-v
```
Verbose output. `-t tolerance` The maximum tolerance [m] between the Superfish geometry and the scattered data. This option is useful when the GPT inputfile doesn’t precisely match the superfish file. The default tolerance is 1 micron.

```
-g GPTfile
```
Writes a GPT scatter file based in the Superfish geometry as specified in `fishfile`.

```
-y height
```
Specifies the y-height [m] for a rectangular geometry. When a GPT inputfile is generated the boundary elements range from *y*=`–height`/2 to *y*=`height`/2. When not specified, the geometry is assumed to be cylindrical symmetric.

```
-z offset
```
Subtract the specified offset [m] from the data before starting the analysis.

```
fishfile
```
Superfish file describing the cylindrical symmetric geometry. The first region is assumed to be the boundary and is ignored. `scatfile.gdf` GPT outputfile with scatter statistics to be ‘unrolled’.

The arrays written in `outfile.gdf` are written per plate number `nn`. They are:

```
scat_nnx
```
x-coordinate of primary particle [m].

```
scat_nny
```
y-coordinate of primary particle [m].

```
scat_nnz
```
z-coordinate of primary particle [m].

```
scat_nnE
```
Energy of primary particle minus the energy of all scattered particles [J].

```
scat_nnQ
```
Charge of primary particle minus the charge of all scattered particles [Q].

```
scat_nnd
```
Unrolled position [m].

For cylindrical symmetric geometries, the following arrays are also written:

```
scat_nnphi
```
Angle in xy-plane [rad], measured counterclockwise from the x-axis.

```
scat_nnr
```
Distance to z-axis [m].

```
scat_nnEor
```
Identical to scat_nnE divided by scat_nnr.

```
scat_nnQor
```
Identical to scat_nnQ divided by scat_nnr.

```
scat_nnrphi
```
Identical to scat_nnr times scat_nnphi.

Fishfile is the main program to analyze the results of a collector simulation using GPT. The raw output of GPT consists of the 3D collision point and the charge and energy of both the primary and the scatted particles, as described in section 1.11.2. Interpreting these results is time-consuming and difficult. The Fishfile program automates most analysis parts using the concept of ‘unrolled’ data. Furthermore, Fishfile is capable of generating a GPT file containing the boundary elements from a Superfish inputfile.

For cylindrical-symmetric geometries, the `x` and `y` coordinates in the Superfish file are converted to `r` and `z` respectively. When the `–y` option is used, the geometry is assumed to be cartesian and the `x` and `y` coordinates are converted to `z` and `x` respectively. In both cases, the units are converted from [cm] to [m].
