## 3.7 GDF2DXF

```
gdf2dxf [-hHvlp] [–f scaling] [-o outfile] inputfile x y [z] [fx fy [fz]]
```
Converts a GDF file to a point, line or vector drawing for further use in a 2D or 3D drawing package.

```
-h
```
Give short help and quit

```
-H
```
Give long help and quit

```
-v
```
Verbose mode

```
-l
```
Output lineplots

```
-p
```
Output scatterplots (default)

```
-o outfile
```
Write output to outfile

```
infile
```
Name of the file to perform the calculations on. When GDF2DXF has to read from `stdin,` a dash (`-`) must be specified explicitly for `infile`. The name of the array specifying the x-coordinates.

```
y
```
The name of the array specifying the y-coordinates.

```
z
```
Optional name of the array specifying the z-coordinates. If this array is specified, the drawing package must be able to handle 3D data.

For vector plots, the following additional options are available:

```
-f scaling
```
Vector plot only: Specify the scaling for the vector length.

```
fx
```
Optional name of the array specifying the x-direction for vector plots.

```
fy
```
Optional name of the array specifying the y-direction for vector plots.

```
fz
```
Optional name of the array specifying the z-direction for vector plots.

GDF2DXF can be used to export GDF data to the DXF format. The latter format is recognized by almost all drawing packages and DTP programs currently available. It allows you for example to plot simulated particle trajectories through a schematic drawing of your set-up. For example to import the zx-plane of a GDF file as a line drawing into AutoCAD, the following commands can be specified:

```
```

GDF2DXF -l -o outfile.dxf infile.gdf z x
```
Start AutoCAD

```
dxfin outfile.dxf

```
