## 3.8 GDF2GDF

```
gdf2gdf [-hHvis] [-t group] [-o outfile] [-a outfile]
  infile1 [value1] [infile2 [value2]] ...
```
Combines several GDF files into a single file, optionally sorting the top-level group.

```
-h
```
Give short help and quit.

```
-H
```
Give long help and quit.

```
-v
```
Verbose mode. Progress and file statistics are shown.

```
-i
```
Ignore recoverable errors and continue.

```
-s
```
Sort top-level group.

```
-t group
```
Top-level group.

```
-o outfile
```
Write output to `outfile`.

```
-a outfile
```
Append output to `outfile`.

```
infile[s]
```
Names of all the GDF files to be concatenated

```
value[s]
```
Optional values for the top-level group.

GDF2GDF combines several GDF files into a single large one. If `file1.gdf`, `file2.gdf` and `file3.gdf` have the exact same hierarchy, they can be combined into `all.gdf` with the following commandline:

```
gdf2gdf –o all.gdf file1.gdf file2.gdf file3.gdf.

```
Things get a little more complicated if the files to be combined do not have the same hierarchy. A typical scenario for this is when a file produced by MR needs to be combined with the result of a single additional run. Suppose that the MR file `var135.gdf` contains the simulation results for the variable `var` being 1, 3 and 5 and that the single run, `single4.gdf`, is created for `var` equal 4. These files can be combined, but only if the top-level group is specified with the `–t` option:

```
gdf2gdf –t var –o all.gdf var135.gdf single4.gdf

```
GDF2GDF will try to extract the value of `var` from `single4.gdf` to rearrange the hierarchy, but this only works if the file has been produced by MR. If the file has been produced by GPT, e.g. `gpt -o single4.gdf inputfile.in var=4`, this will not work. In that case, the value for the top-level group must be given directly after the filename on the commandline as follows:

```
gdf2gdf –t var –o all.gdf var135.gdf single4.gdf 4

```
Even this may not produce the desired result, as the ordering for `var` will become 1, 3, 5, 4. If sorted output is desired, please use the `–s` option to sort the top-level domain ascending order.

```
gdf2gdf -s –t var –o all.gdf var135.gdf single4.gdf 4

```
Technical note: When the inputfiles are huge, GDF2GDF first locks them, and subsequently reads them all storing only the hierarchy. The actual data is not stored but recorded as 64-bit file-offsets into the locked inputfiles. The next step builds the structure of the outputfile in memory by concatenating the hierarchy of the inputfiles. If needed, one level of hierarchy is added for single runs, and optionally the top-level domain is sorted. As a last step, the outputfile is written as one set of consecutive write operations, where each time the data is fetched from the appropriate inputfile at the stored location.
