## 3.9 GDF2HIS

```
gdf2his [-hHvbls] [-n weight] [-o outfile] infile array width [offset]
```
Calculates histograms of the specified array. For every particle in this array GDF2HIS determines which interval of the histogram it belongs to and raises the count for that bar by one.

```
-h
```
Give short help and quit.

```
-H
```
Give long help and quit.

```
-v
```
Verbose mode. Displays the number of bars in the histogram for every group in the `infile`.

```
-b
```
Write the complete histogram. When this option is selected, the output can be plotted as a lineplot outlining the individual bars of the histogram.

```
-l
```
Write the outline of the histogram. When plotted as a lineplot only the outline of the histogram is shown, not the individual bars.

```
-s
```
Divide the height of the histograms by the specified `width`.

```
-n weight
```
Count all contributions as specified in the `weight` array. For GPT simulations, `nmacro` can be used to count the number of elementary particles.

```
-o outfile
```
Write output to a file named `outfile`. If not specified the output is written to `stdout`.

```
infile
```
Name of the file containing the array to calculate histograms of. When GDF2HIS has to read from `stdin`, a dash (`-`) must be specified explicitly for `infile`.

```
array
```
Name of the array used to calculate the histogram. Typical examples are `z` and `G`.

```
width
```
Width of an interval within the histogram.

```
offset
```
The ‘left-right’ offset of the bars. If not specified, 0 is assumed, indicating one bar to the left side of zero and one to the right.

When GDF2HIS is run, a histogram is calculated for every group in the GDF file containing the specified array. In these groups, the following two arrays are appended: `array_his`: Array of the positions of the centers of the intervals. `array_cnt`: Array of the number of datapoints within one interval. The string `array` is replaced by the name of the array specified on the commandline. The range of the histograms is obtained automatically from the minimum and maximum values of the data.

When the `-b` option is selected on the commandline, the arrays `array_hisbar` and `array_cntbar` are written in the ouputfile as well. When these two arrays are plotted as a xy-lineplot, the bars of the histogram are drawn.

When the `-l` option is selected, the arrays `array_hisline` and `array_cntline` are also written in the ouputfile. When these two arrays are plotted as a xy-lineplot, the outline of the histogram is drawn.

Example: Suppose `infile.gdf` is a file containing all particle coordinates at different times. To calculate a histogram of the energy distribution in steps of 0.01, the following command can be specified:

```
gdf2his -b -o outfile.gdf infile.gdf G 0.01
```
This produces the file `outfile.gdf` where the arrays `G_cntbar` and `G_hisbar` are appended for every GDF group containing the particles. The outputfile should be plotted using a line plot, Figure 3-4.

Figure 3-4: Example of GDF2HIS. The gamma’s of the particles of a bunch are converted to a histogram to show the energy distribution.
