## 4.11 Miscellaneous

This section contains all built-in elements not easily placed in any of the other categories.

4.
1
1.1 CCS
4.
1
1.2 CCSflip
4.
1
1.3 Collision
4.
1
1.4 Drift
4.
1
1.5 Gravity
4.
1
1.6 Overlaptest
4.
1
1.7 Randomize
4.
1
1.8 Run
4.
1
1.9 SetRlimit
4.
1
1.10 Viscosity

### 4.11.1 CCS

```
ccs(ECS,CCSname) ;
```
Defines a Custom Coordinate System.

```
ECS
```
The coordinate system transform.

```
CCSname
```
The name of the Custom Coordinate System.

See section 1.4.3 for the description of Custom Coordinate Systems.

### 4.11.2 CCSflip

```
ccsflip(ECS,CCSname) ;
```
Refer all particles to another axis.

```
ECS
```
The coordinate system transform.

```
CCSname
```
The name of the Custom Coordinate System to transfer the particle to.

All particles coordinates are refered to the axis named `CCSname` when *z*>0 in the specified ECS.

See section 1.4.3 for the description of Custom Coordinate Systems.

### 4.11.3 Collision

```
collision() ;
```
Detect particle-particle collisions and start a new вҖҳcombinedвҖҷ particle.

At the end of every successful timestep collisions between two particles are detected when: *j* *j* *R* пҖј вҲ’**r** **r**

When a collision is detected, both particles are removed and a new particle is created. The new position is equal to the mass-weighted average position. The new momentum is the sum of the moments of the initial particles: ) /( ) ( ) /( ) ( *j* *j* *j* *j* *j* *new* *new* *j* *j* *j* *j* *j* *new* *m* *n* *m* *n* *m* *n* *m* *n* *m* *n* *m* *n* *m* *n* *m* *n* + + = пғһ + = + + = пҒ§пҒў пҒ§пҒў пҒ§пҒў **p** **p** **p** **r** **r** **r**

The new mass and charge are the sum of the mass and charge of the original particles as given by: *new* *j* *j* *new* *new* *j* *j* *new* *j* *new* *n* *m* *n* *m* *n* *m* *n* *q* *n* *q* *n* *q* *n* *n* *n* /) ( /) ( + = + = + =

Miscellaneous

### 4.11.4 Drift

```
drift(ECS,L,[R]) ;
```
Drift section.

```
ECS
```
Element Coordinate System.

```
L
```
Length of the drift section [m].

```
R
```
Radius [m]. When this parameter is specified, the particle is removed when

```
R
```
пҖҫ +* **y* .

This element is вҖҳactiveвҖҷ when

```
L
```
пҖј *z* . It does nothing except optionally remove a particle when it is too far from the axis. If your set up has large sections without elements it is recommended to use `drift`. It can speed up calculation time because all the other local elements on the axis don't have to be checked each timestep.

Although this element can be replaced by a `rmax`, it is recommended to use `drift` when possible because it is local and therefore faster.

### 4.11.5 Gravity

```
gravity(gx,gy,gz) ;
```
Calculates uniform relativistic gravity force

```
gx
```
Gravitational acceleration [m/s2] in x-direction.

```
gy
```
Gravitational acceleration [m/s2] in y-direction.

```
gz
```
Gravitational acceleration [m/s2] in z-direction.

For non-relativistic velocities, the gravitational field is simply given by: **g** **F** *m* = where **g** is the gravitational acceleration. For relativistic particles however, the more complicated equation from the general theory of relativity must be used: пҒӣ пҒқ **ОІ** **g** **ОІ** **g** **ОІ** **F** ) ( ) 1( пғ— вҲ’ + =* **m* пҒ§

The equation is derived from the relativistic gravity force of a spherically symmetric object with mass *M* given by: ) ( ) 1( *r* *r* *c* *E* *GM* **ОІ** **r** **ОІ** **ОІ** **F** пғ— вҲ’ + вҲ’ = where *G* is the gravitational constant and *E* is the particle energy *mc* пҒ§ . When the particle displacement is much smaller than *r*, the spherical field can be approximated by a uniform field using /* r* *GM***r** **g** вҲ’ = .

### 4.11.6 Overlaptest

```
overlaptest() ;
```
Tests if local elements overlap on-axis.

As described in section 1.4.1, the GPT kernel does not allow local elements to overlap beyond neighbouring centers. This element can be added to the inputfile to run an on-axis test to see if local elements erroneously overlap. In case of a modeling error, an error with detailed information is printed and GPT does not start tracking.

When GPT is run with the вҖ“v option, this element prints the boundaries of all local elements.

### 4.11.7 Randomize

```
randomize([seed]) ;
```
Initialize the GPT random-number generator.

```
seed
```
Number indicating the starting point in the sequence of random numbers generated by GPT. The system time is used when omitted.

Without randomization, all pseudorandom sequences will reproduce from run to run. Using randomize you can specify a different `seed` for a different, but reproducing, sequence. When `seed` is not specified, the system time is used to assure every GPT run uses a different sequence.

When `randomize` is used in combination with the random-ordering specification (`~`) of the initial particle distributions, please make sure it appears before the corresponding `set...dist` element(s).

### 4.11.8 Run

```
run(program, [param1, param2, ...]) ;
```
Runs an external command.

```
program
```
Command to be executed.

```
param
```
Optional parameter(s).

Using `run`, any external program can be executed that doesnвҖҷt require interactive (keyboard) input. When additional parameters are specified, they are separated by spaces and passed to the program. For example, the following lines will delete the file `filename` in the current directory. `run("del", "filename") ; # `**Windows**` ` `run("rm" , "filename") ; # `**Linux**` `

Variables, expressions and the redirection operators вҖҳ`<`вҖҷ, вҖҳ`|`вҖҷ and вҖҳ`>`вҖҷ work as usual. For example the following code fragment runs` program -2 3.141592653589793 /options` and writes the output to the file `program.log`.

```
a = -2 ;
b = pi ;
run("program ",a,b, "/options", ">program.log")

```
Obviously, when specific Linux or DOS commands are specified, the GPT inputfile is not portable anymore. Furthermore, only command-line programs are supported by the GPTwin graphical user interface.

### 4.11.9 SetRlimit

```
setrlimit(resource,soft,hard) ;
```
Limits the use of system resources.

```
resource
```
Must be any of: `"CORE"` (maximum size of the core file [bytes]), `"CPU" `(Time limit in [s]), `"DATA"` (maximum size [bytes] of the data segment) or `"FSIZE"` (largest size [bytes] for any file written).

```
soft
```
The soft limit for the `resource`, implemented for the resource `"CPU" `only.

```
hard
```
The hard limit for the `resource`, implemented for all resources.

This element limits the use of system resources, in particular CPU time. It is primarily used to prevent GDFMGO/GDFSOLVE from wasting CPU time on unrealistic input parameters. This element is only implemented for the Linux/Mac version of GPT.

Setting the `"CPU"` limit instructs GPT to try to finish the current timestep and close all outputfiles after the `soft` limit is reached. When the `hard`-limit is reached for any `resource`, the program is terminated regardless of the state of the outputfile. This may result in corrupt and unreadable outputfiles. The following example sets a soft limit of 1000 and a hard limit of 1200 seconds:

```
setrlimit("CPU",1000,1200) ;

```
The implementation of `setrlimit` is a 1:1 mapping to the `setrlimit` function of the underlying operating system. Please consult your system documentation for technical details as they tend to differ slightly.

### 4.11.10 Viscosity

```
viscosity(eta) ;
```
Calculates viscosity forces.

Miscellaneous

```
eta
```
viscosity [Pa s]: пҒЁ.

This element adds a linear viscosity force as function of particle velocity. The viscosity force acts on all particles and is given by: *c* *R*** ****ОІ** **F** пҒЁ пҒ° вҲ’ =

The radius of the particles *R* can be set using the `setrmacrodist` keyword. Typical `eta` values are 17.1 10- 6 for air and 1.00 10-3 for water at standard pressure and room temperature.
