## 4.1 Inputfile syntax

A GPT inputfile is an ASCII file describing the set up that is to be simulated. This section is a reference for the inputfile language. For information on how to write your own GPT inputfiles, we refer to the tutorial (chapter 2).

A YACC generated parser is used to handle the expressions, if-statements, functions and variables that can be used in the GPT inputfile. YACC uses a specified grammar and operator precedence and generates code to parse the inputfile accordingly. The grammar is chosen to be very close to the standard C expression language with the addition of string concatenation using the `+` operator. Tables of built-in constants, operator precedence and built-in functions are given at the end of this section.

A GPT inputfile is defined as follows:

```
inputfile
```
An ASCII file containing a `statementlist`.

All blanks, tabs, new lines and everything following the character `#` till the end of the line are ignored. `statementlist` One or or more `statement`s.

```
statement
```
One of the following:

```
variable = value ; variable = string ;

keyword( parameters ) ; if(condition) statement [else statement]

{ statementlist }
variable
```
Sequence of letters and digits, not starting with a digit.

Built-in and previously assigned constants can be set to a new value. This is generally not advisable and a warning is printed.

```
value
```
A floating point number, a built-in constant or a formula in standard notation. The formula may contain floating point numbers, built-in constants, user-defined variables and functions.

```
keyword
```
Any of the keywords listed in chapter 3.

```
parameters
```
One or more `value`s or `string`s separated by commas.

```
string
```
Anything enclosed by double quotation marks.

Table 4-A: Operators in decreasing order of precedence. Their associativity indicates in what order operators of equal precedence in an expression are applied. Symbol Description Associativity

```
()
```
Parenthesis (grouping) Left-to-right

```
!
```
Factorial Right-to-left `+`, `-` Unary plus, minus

```
^
```
Exponential, right associative Right-to-left `*`**, **`/`** ** Multiplication, division Left-to-right `+`, `-` Value: Addition, subtraction Left-to-right

```
<, <=
```
Relational less than/less than or equal to Left-to-right

```
>, >=
```
Relational greater than/greater than or equal to

`!=, == `Relational is not equal to/is equal to Left-to-right `and`,` && `Logical AND Left-to-right `or`,` || ` Logical OR Left-to-right

```
? :
```
Ternary conditional Right-to-left

```
=
```
Assignment Right-to-left

Table 4-B: Built-in constants. Name Value Description

```
c
```
Speed of light

```
deg
```
180/π Conversion factor from radians to degrees

```
e
```
2.71828182845904523536 e `eps0 `1/𝜇0𝑐2 Permittivity of vacuum: 𝜀0

```
m
```
Default: `me` Mass of an elementary particle

```
ma
```
1.66057·10–27 Unified mass constant

```
me
```
9.10953·10–31 Mass of an electron

```
mp
```
1.67265·10–27 Mass of a proton

```
mu0
```
4π ∙10−7 Permeability of vacuum: 𝜇0

```
pi
```
3.14159265358979323846 π

```
q
```
Default: `qe` Charge of an elementary particle

```
qe
```
–1.6021892·10–19 Charge of an electron

Table 4-C: Built-in functions. Name Description

```
defined(x)
```
TRUE if `x` is defined, FALSE otherwise

```
sin(x)
```
sine of `x`

```
cos(x)
```
cosine of `x`

```
tan(x)
```
tangent of `x`

```
asin(x)
```
sin–1(`x`) in range [−π 2, π 2 ⁄ ⁄ ], `x`  [–1,1]

```
acos(x)
```
cos–1(`x`) in range [0, π], `x` [–1, 1]

```
atan(x)
```
tan–1(`x`) in range [−π 2, π 2 ⁄ ⁄ ]

```
sinh(x)
```
hyperbolic sine of `x`

```
cosh(x)
```
hyperbolic cosine of `x`

```
tanh(x)
```
hyperbolic tangent of `x`

```
asinh(x)
```
Area (inverse) hyperbolic sine of `x`

```
acosh(x)
```
Area (inverse) hyperbolic cosine of `x`

```
atanh(x)
```
Area (inverse) hyperbolic tangent of `x`

```
log(x)
```
Natural (base-e) logarithm of `x`.

```
log10(x)
```
Common (base 10) logarithm of `x`.

```
log2(x)
```
Binary (base-2) logarithm of `x`

```
log1p(x)
```
High precision version of `log(1+x)` for small `x`

```
exp(x)
```
Base-e exponential of `x`

```
exp2(x)
```
Base-2 exponential of `x`

```
expm1(x)
```
High precision version of `exp(x)-1` for small `x`

```
sqrt(x)
```
`x` , `x`0

```
cbrt(x)
```
`x`1/3 `abs(x), |x| `|`x`|

```
ceil(x)
```
Smallest integer2 not less than `x`

```
floor(x)
```
Largest integer2 not greater than `x`

```
round(x)
```
Integer nearest to `x`

```
trunc(x)
```
Round `x` towards zero

```
erf(x)
```
Error function  − *t** **dt* *e* 

```
erfc(x)
```
Complimentary error function `1-erf(x)`

```
tgamma(x)
```
Gamma function of `x`

```
lgamma(x)
```
Natural logarithm of the absolute value of the Gamma function of `x`

```
random(…)
```
Pseudorandom number number with parameters given in Table 1-C.

Pseudorandom number support is provided thorught the **random** function, where available paramters are given in the 1D column of Table 1-C on page 19. For example `random("u",0,1)` creates a pseudorandom number from a uniform distribution centerd around `0` having a total width of `1`.

2 Please note that `ceil(-pi)=-3` and `floor(-pi)=-4`

The GPT inputfile parser has limited support for string operations. The table below gives the basic functionality. Table 4-D: String functions Name Description

```
getenv(s)
```
Returns the environment variable `s` as a string. An error is printed when environment variable `s` does not exist.

```
(a + b)
```
Concatenate string `a` and `b`

```
string(n)
```
Returns number `n` as a string.

```
string(n,f)
```
Returns number `n` as a string in specified format `f`. The format is interpreted as C-style printf notation, for example `"%.15e"` will return a number in exponential notation with 15 digits precision.

```
number(s)
```
Convert string `s` to a number. An error is printed when `s` is not a number.
