## 4.3 Timestep and output control

This section contains the elements controlling the Runge-Kutta solver and output generation. Using `accuracy`, the calculation accuracy can be specified. The `tout` and `screen` keywords specify the time and position when output is written. The other elements can be used to have more control over the timestep mechanism or provide additional or diagnostic output.

4.3.1 Acceptance
4.3.2 Accuracy
4.3.3 dtmax
4.3.4 dtmaxt
4.3.5 dtmin
4.3.6 dtstart
4.3.7 Outputvalue
4.3.8 Pp
4.3.9 safety
4.3.10 Screen
4.3.11 Snapshot
4.3.12 Tcontinue
4.3.13 time
4.3.14 tmax
4.3.15 Tout
4.3.16 Writeelegant
4.3.17 Writefloorplan
4.3.18 Writesteps

### 4.3.1 Acceptance

```
acceptance(ECS) ;
```
Write acceptance information to the GPT outputfile.

```
ECS
```
All output is written relative to the Element Coordinate System specified here.

When beam-pipes and other obstacles are introduced in a GPT simulation not all particles necessarily make it through. To investigate which part of the initial phase space is (not) removed downstream the `acceptance` keyword can be used. Furthermore, this element can be very helpful in debugging GPT inputfiles when particles are lost by an unknown element. The following arrays are written to the GPT outputfile.

Particles that make it through:

```
OK_x_start
```
*x*-position [m] where the particle is started

```
OK_y_start
```
*y*-position [m] where the particle is started

```
OK_z_start
```
*z*-position [m] where the particle is started

```
OK_Bx_start
```
*x*-velocity/c when the particle is started

```
OK_By_start
```
*y*-velocity/c when the particle is started

```
OK_Bz_start
```
*z*-velocity/c when the particle is started

```
OK_G_start
```
Lorentz factor when the particle is started

```
OK_t_start
```
Simulation time [s] when the particle is started

Particles that are removed from the simulation:

```
NOK_x_start
```
*x*-position [m] where the particle is started

```
NOK_y_start
```
*y*-position [m] where the particle is started

```
NOK_z_start
```
*z*-position [m] where the particle is started `NOK_Bx_start` *x*-velocity/c when the particle is started `NOK_By_start` *y*-velocity/c when the particle is started `NOK_Bz_start` *z*-velocity/c when the particle is started

```
NOK_G_start
```
Lorentz factor when the particle is started

```
NOK_t_start
```
Simulation time [s] when the particle is started

```
NOK_x_end
```
*x*-position [m] where the particle is removed

```
NOK_y_end
```
*y*-position [m] where the particle is removed

```
NOK_z_end
```
*z*-position [m] where the particle is removed

```
NOK_Bx_end
```
*x*-velocity/c when the particle is removed

```
NOK_By_end
```
*y*-velocity/c when the particle is removed

```
NOK_Bz_end
```
*z*-velocity/c when the particle is removed

```
NOK_G_end
```
Lorentz factor when the particle is removed

```
NOK_t_end
```
Simulation time [s] when the particle is removed

A simple example is shown below: A rectangular beam is sent into a pipe.

```
# Start 1000 particles, square distribution in xy-space
setparticles("beam",1000,me,qe,0.0) ;
setxdist("beam","u",0,2) ;
setydist("beam","u",0,2) ;
setGdist("beam","u",200,0) ;

# Beam pipe with R=0.75 m, between z=1 and z=2 m
rmax("wcs","z",1.5, 0.75,1 ) ;

# Acceptance output
acceptance("wcs","I") ;
tcontinue(4/c) ;

```
The accepted (left) and not accepted (right) part of the initial beam.

### 4.3.2 Accuracy

```
accuracy(GBacc,[xacc]) ;
```
Specifies the calculation accuracy.

```
GBacc
```
Negative base 10 logarithm of the simulation accuracy for . If not specified, 4 is assumed.

```
xacc
```
Negative base 10 logarithm for the simulation accuracy for position. If not specified, 6 is assumed. It is rarely needed to change this value. Increasing `GBacc` usually increases the accuracy for the position simultaneously.

The simulation accuracy is calculated as follows:

```
xacc
GBacc
```
− − = = max max 

The requested accuracy is the minimal accuracy per step. For very long runs with over 104 steps, the final accuracy should be checked by increasing the accuracy and verifying that the result does not change significantly.

For more information about accuracy and timesteps see section 1.8. -
0.5
0.0
0.5 OK_x_start -
0.6 -
0.4 -
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6 OK_y_start -
0.5
0.0
0.5 NOK_x_start -
0.5
0.0
0.5 NOK_y_start

Timestep and output control

### 4.3.3 dtmax

```
dtmax=expression ;
```
Specifies the maximum timestep size.

```
expression
```
Maximum timestep. If the automatic timestep mechanism suggests a timestep larger than `dtmax`, `dtmax` is used. `dtmax` can be used to avoid particles ‘jumping over’ small global elements. Default .

### 4.3.4 dtmaxt

```
dtmaxt(tstart,tend,dtmax) ;
```
Enforce a maximum timestep within a specified interval.

```
tstart
```
Start time.

```
tend
```
End time.

```
dtmax
```
Maximum timestep when `tstart`<*t*<`tend`

Forces the timesteps to remain less than `dtmax` when the simulation time is within `tstart` and `tend`. This element should only be used when the adaptive stepsize control mechanism doesn’t perform satisfactory.

Example: 100 timesteps are enforced between 85 and 95 ns.

```
startpar( "wcs","I", 0,0,0, 0,0,0.5 ) ;
tout( 0, 100e-9, 20e-9 ) ;
dtmaxt( 85e-9, 95e-9, 0.1e-9 ) ;

### 4.3.5 dtmin

```
```
dtmin=expression ;
```
Specifies the minimum timestep size.

```
expression
```
Minimum timestep. If the automatic timestep mechanism suggests a timestep smaller than `dtmin`, `dtmin` is used. Please note that in this case the required accuracy cannot be guaranteed. Before using `dtmin` consider lowering your `accuracy`. Default 0.

### 4.3.6 dtstart

```
dtstart=expression ;
```
Specifies the initial timestep.

```
expression
```
This is the initial value for *h* as described in section 1.8. Subsequent values for *h* are calculated automatically. Default: Twice the separation between the initial two particles, or c if all particles are started simultaneously.

### 4.3.7 Outputvalue

```
outputvalue(name,expr) ;
```
Writes a value in the outputfile.

```
name
```
Name of the value as it will be written in the outputfile.` `

```
expr
```
Value to be written in the outputfile. Any expression can be entered.` `

Example:

```
w = 240e6 ;
outputvalue("freq", 2*pi*w) ;

### 4.3.8 Pp

```
```
pp(param1,param2,...) ;
```
Print parameters for diagnostic purposes.

This line instructs GPT to print the values of the parameters to `stderr`. Checking the results of intermediate calculations in an inputfile is a useful debug aid.

### 4.3.9 safety

```
safety=expression ;
```
Specifies the safety parameter.

```
expression
```
The safety parameter *S* as described in section 1.8. Default 0.85.

Reducing the safety parameter can save a small amount of CPU time when tracking particle trajectories through fast changing fields.

### 4.3.10 Screen

```
screen(ECS,at,[CCSname]) ;
screen(ECS,from,to,step,[CCSname]) ;
```
Writes particle coordinates when the particles pass through a nondestructive screen to the outputfile.

```
ECS
```
Element Coordinate System of the screen. Using the ECS, the screen(s) can be located anywhere in space with any orientation.

```
at
```
The screen is positioned at z=`at` with respect to the specified `ECS`. `from,to,step` The screens are positioned at *z*=`from`+*N*`step` if `from`*t*`to`, where *N*[0,1,2,...].

```
CCSname
```
The name of the CCS relative to which the coordinates of the particles will be written. If not specified, the screens ECS is used.

The typical use to position a screen at for example the *z*=5 meter plane is:

```
screen("wcs", "I", 5) ;

```
For every screen a separate group in the GPT outputfile, named `position` with value `at` is created. The coordinates written in the outputfile are listed in Table 4-E. When positioning multiple screens in combination with GDFA, you can group by `position` to create useful plots. Particles in rings can 'hit' the same screen several times. In that case multiple recordings of the same particle, with different t, will be present in the outputfile.

Table 4-E: Coordinates in the `position` group written by the `screen` element.

```
ID
```
Particle identification numbers. `x`,`y`,`z` Positions of the particles.

```
rxy
```
Particle distances from the *z*-axis. `Bx`,`By`,`Bz` Velocities of the particles normalized to the speed of light.

```
G
```
Lorentz factors of the particles.

```
t
```
Time when the particles pass the screen.

The equation for the screen is: ( ) ˆ =  − − **z** **o** **r** **M** *WCS* *EW* where **z** **M** **o** **o** ˆ  + = *CW* *EW*

```
at

```
For information about the used notation and coordinate systems in general, see section 1.4.

The coordinates are calculated via 'perfect' interpolation between two consecutive timesteps, where the interpolation error is always below or equal to the tracking error. Screens need to buffer particle coordinates and involve complex interpolations. They are slower and consume more resources compared to snapshots.

### 4.3.11 Snapshot

```
snapshot(time,[CCSname]) ;
snapshot(from,to,step,[CCSname]) ;
```
Writes the coordinates of the particles at the given simulation time to the outputfile.

```
time
```
Simulation time when the coordinates of the particles are to be written in the outputfile.

Timestep and output control

`from,to,step` The coordinates of the particles are to be written in the outputfile at *t*=`from`+*N*`step` if `from ` *t * `to`, where *N*[0,1,2,...].

```
CCSname
```
The name of the CCS relative to which the coordinates of the particles are to be written. If not specified, WCS is assumed.

The coordinates of the particles are written in the outputfile when the simulation time is the specified `time`. When `from to step` is specified, output is written periodically.

For every time output a separate group in the outputfile, named `time` with value `time`, is created containing the following coordinates: Table 4-F: Coordinates in the `time` group written by the `tout` element.

```
ID
```
Particle identification numbers. `x`,`y`,`z` Positions of the particles.

```
rxy
```
Particle distances from the *z*-axis. `Bx`,`By`,`Bz` Velocities of the particles normalized to the speed of light.

```
G
```
Lorentz factors of the particles.

The automatic timestep algorithm is not affected by the snapshots. This allows the ODE solver to take the largest possible step, given the current accuracy setting, making snapshots the fastest output mechanism. Please see the `tout` keyword when the electromagnetic fiels output is required.

### 4.3.12 Tcontinue

```
tcontinue(t) ;
```
Continue the simulation till the specified time

```
t
```
Minimum simulation time [s].

Normally, GPT stops execution after the last `tout` or `screen`. To overrule this behavior, the `tcontinue` element forces GPT to continue until the specified time `t`. This element is useful when solving additional differential equations with custom output routines. When scattering statistics are to be obtained it is typically used with all `tout` statements removed.

Stopping GPT takes precedence over `tcontinue`. In other words, when an element actively signals to stop GPT, the simulation will always be stopped.

### 4.3.13 time

```
time=expression ;
```
Specifies the simulation starting time.

```
expression
```
Starting time of the simulation. Default: Release time of first particles to be started.

Usually used to continue a simulation using a different inputfile. See `setfile` for more documentation.

### 4.3.14 tmax

```
tmax=expression ;
```
Forces the simulation to stop at the specified simulation time.

```
expression
```
Maximum simulation time [s]. Default: ∞.

A GPT simulation typically continues to run until all particles pass all screens. However, when particles go back due to for example a decelerating rf-phase, they never hit the last screen. This potentially results in a simulation that continues to run forever. Ideally this situation is prevented by removing all backstreaming particles with for example `zminmax` and `rmax`. A very effective alternative is setting a maximum simulation time with `tmax`.

Please note that `tmax` does not set the maximum CPU time.

### 4.3.15 Tout

```
tout(time,[CCSname]) ;
tout(from,to,step,[CCSname]) ;
```
Writes the electromagnetic fields at the position of all particle coordinates at the given simulation time to the GPT outputfile.

```
time
```
Simulation time when the coordinates of the particles are to be written in the outputfile. `from,to,step` The coordinates of the particles are to be written in the outputfile at *t*=`from`+*N*`step` if `from ` *t * `to`, where *N*[0,1,2,...].

```
CCSname
```
The name of the CCS relative to which the coordinates of the particles are to be written. If not specified, WCS is assumed.

The coordinates of the particles are written in the outputfile when the simulation time is the specified `time`. When `from to step` is specified, output is written periodically.

For every time output a separate group in the outputfile, named `time` with value `time`, is created containing the following coordinates: Table 4-G: Coordinates in the `time` group written by the `tout` element.

```
ID
```
Particle identification numbers. `x`,`y`,`z` Positions of the particles.

```
rxy
```
Particle distances from the *z*-axis. `Bx`,`By`,`Bz` Velocities of the particles normalized to the speed of light.

```
G
```
Lorentz factors of the particles. `fEx`,`fEy`,`fEz` Electric fields at particle positions. `fBx`,`fBy`,`fBz` Magnetic fields at particle positions.

To obtain field information, the automatic timestep algorithm generates its timesteps in such a way that the particle coordinates are calculated at exactly the requested `time`. This slows down the ODE solver. If electromagnetic field information is not required, please use the snapshot keyword. e relative to maximum acceleration.

### 4.3.16 Writeelegant

```
writeelegant() ;
```
Adds additional information to GPT screen output such that it can be used 1:1 as an Elegant inputfile

Adding this line to the GPT inputfile instructs GPT to write additional information to the GPT outputfile for all screens. More specifically, the following data is written:

```
xp
```
Vector given by `GBx`/`GBz`

```
yp
```
Vector given by `GBy`/`GBz`

```
p
```
Vector given by sqrt(`G`2-1)

```
Particles
```
Number of particles

```
pCentral
```
Average of `p`

```
Charge
```
Total charge where `GBx`, `GBy`, `GBz` and `G` and the normalized momenta and the Lorentz factor respectively.

To use the written GDF output as Elegant inputfile, it still has to be converted to SDDS format using the GDF2SDDS program using:

```
gdf2sdds –o output.sdds output.gdf

### 4.3.17 Writefloorplan

```
```
writefloorplan(filename) ;
```
Writes all center coordinates and orientations of all beamline components to a file.

```
filename
```
Name of the file to write information to [gdf].

Timestep and output control

This elements writes positional information of all coordinate systems and all beamline components defined in the GPT inputfile to the speficified `filename`. Both the center coordinates and the orientation are transformed back to World Coordinate System (WCS) to ease comparison with CAD programs and other simulations codes. Despite the name `writefloorplan`, the element does *not* project 3D information onto a 2D plane.

The specified `filename` is written in `gdf` format and has the following structure: For the built-in WCS and for each CCS a separate group is created with the name of the Coordinate System. Each group contains the positional information of the Coordinate System itself, the positional information of all local elements and the positional information of all global elements. The encoding is as follows:

```
type
```
Flag to indicate the type of information:

`0`: CCS definition

`1`: Local element

`2`: Global element `xcenter, ycenter, zcenter `Center position, measured in WCS [m,m,m]` `

```
xx, xy, xz
```
Normalized direction of the *x*-axis, measured in WCS []** **

```
yx, yy, yz
```
Normalized Direction of the *y*-axis, measured in WCS []** **

```
zx, zy, zz
```
Normalized Direction of the *z*-axis, measured in WCS []** **

Modeling large accelerator facilities with many bend magnets is possible in GPT using Custom Coordinate Systems. These additional coordinate systems ease the positioning of downstream beamline components, while simultaneously providing a performance increase. However, especially when many coordinate systems are all defined relative to each other, it can be challenging to figure out where beamline components are positioned relative to World Coordinate System (WCS). This `writefloorplan` element can be used to debug such situations by cross-checking the WCS coordinates with CAD drawings or other simulations codes.

If desired, the output of `writefloorplan` can be converted to ASCII using the GDF2A program

```
GDF2A –w 16 –o filename.txt filename.gdf

### 4.3.18 Writesteps

```
```
writesteps([filename.gdf])
```
Write timestep information to the outputfile for performance debugging

`filename.gdf` Optional external filename for output

The `writesteps` command stores all timestep information of the entire simulation to either the usual GPT outputfile or in the specified `outputfile.gdf`. The following information is recorded:

```
t
```
Simulation time [s].

```
dt
```
Timestep taken [s].

```
fail
```
Number of failed steps at t.

```
avgx
```
Average x-coordinate [m] of all particles at t.

```
avgy
```
Average y-coordinate [m] of all particles at t.

```
avgz
```
Average z-coordinate [m] of all particles at t.

The automatic stepsize algorithm in GPT does not aim for the highest possible accuracy. It aims for the largest allowed stepsize. The algorithm that dynamically adjusts the stepsizes for each beamline component is written such that once in a while a timestep fails. This is by design because recovering from a few failures once in a while gives far better overall performance than ‘playing it safe’. After a timestep fails the dynamic timestep algorithm estimates the best size of a smaller timestep based on the assumption that the fields are differentiable to 5th order. And this is where performance can suffer dramatically. Even small discontinuities in the fields, such as a beamline component with a fringe-field that is cut too soon can cause many failed steps.

To show where CPU time is spent during the simulation, one can make various plots of the output of `writesteps`. A good starting point is observing if the fail rate is at or below about 4 everywhere. This value is a arguably arbitrary, but in our experience discontinuous fields give very high fail rates and are easily detectable. Plotting avgx,avgy,avgz at high fail counts gives an immediate indication where performance can be improved. Often it is simple changes, such as extending the fringes a bit further, that make dramatic differences in performance.

Accelerating structures
