## 4.5 Static electric fields

This section contains the elements generating static electric fields.

4.5.1 Circlecharge
4.5.2 Ecyl
4.5.3 Ehole
4.5.4 Erect
4.5.5 Linecharge
4.5.6 Platecharge
4.5.7 Pointcharge
4.5.8 pointchargeset

### 4.5.1 Circlecharge

```
circlecharge(ECS,R,lambda) ;
```
Circle with homogeneous charge density.

```
ECS
```
Element Coordinate System.

```
R
```
Radius of the ring [m].

```
lambda
```
Charge density [C/m].

Figure 4-4: Electric field in the xz-plane and corresponding potential. The circle with radius `R` having a homogeneous charge density `lambda` in [C/m] is located in the xy-plane centered around the origin. The potential of the electric field is given in spherical coordinates by: ( )  − + =        ) cos( ) sin( , *d* *Rr* *r* *R* *R* *r* *V*

The electric field is calculated from *V* − = **E** . The integral and gradient are calculated analytically.

### 4.5.2 Ecyl

```
ecyl(ECS,R,L,E) ;
```
Constant **E** field bounded by cylinder.

```
ECS
```
Element Coordinate System.

```
R
```
Radius of the cylinder [m].

```
L
```
Cylinder length [m].

```
E
```
Electric field strength [V/m].

The **E** field generated by this element is given by:      + = otherwise and

if ˆ

```
L
R
E
```
*z* *y* *z* **E**

### 4.5.3 Ehole

```
ehole(ECS,R,E1,E0) ;
```
Two regions with uniform electric field, separated by a conducting plate with circular hole.

```
ECS
```
Element Coordinate System.

```
R
```
Radius of the hole.

```
E1
```
Uniform field strength at negative *z*.

```
E0
```
Uniform field strength at positive *z*.

This element models two regions of uniform electric field in the *z*-direction, separated by an infinitely thin conducting plate with a circular hole. The electromagnetic field is fully analytic, where the effect of the hole is given by [8]:             + − − − =      arctan ) ( ) , (

```
R
R
E1
E0
```
*z* *r* *z* *V* with ( ) / − + =

```
R
```
*r* *z*  and /

```
R
```
*z* + =   . In case `R` is specified as zero, this element reduces to two regions of uniform electric field in the *z*-direction.

To remove particles crossing the plate, `ehole` can be combined with `scatteriris` as shown below:

```
; Plate at z=1 m, with 1 mm hole.
zplate = 1 ;
radius = 1e-3 ;
ehole("wcs","z",zplate, radius, E1, E0) ;
; Remove particles crossing the plate
forwardscatter("wcs","I","remove", 0) ;
scatteriris("wcs","z",zplate, radius,1 ) scatter="remove" ;

```
**Example: Einzel lens ** The `ehole` element is not particularly useful itself, as it stretches from –∞ to +∞. However, it can be used as building block to construct all kinds of electrostatic focusing systems. For example an Einzel lens can easily be constructed by combining three `ehole` elements:

```
zcenter = 1 ;
separation = 0.1 ;
radius = 10e-3
ehole("wcs","z",zcenter-separation, radius, -Efield/2, Efield/2 ) ;
ehole("wcs","z",zcenter           , radius,  Efield  ,-Efield ) ;
ehole("wcs","z",zcenter+separation, radius, -Efield/2, Efield/2 ) ;
rmax("wcs","z",zcenter, radius,2*separation) ;

```
Note: The above summation of three `ehole` elements is only correct if `radius` is much smaller than `separation`. If this assumption is violated an external Poisson solver, such as present in the Superfish set

```
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0.5
1.5
0.5
1.5
2.5
E1
E0
R

```
Static electric fields of codes, must be used to obtain the electrostatic fields. The resulting field can subsequently be imported into GPT with the `map2D_E` element.

### 4.5.4 Erect

```
erect(ECS,a,b,L,E) ;
```
Constant **E** field bounded by a rectangular box.

```
ECS
```
Element Coordinate System.

```
a
```
Total box length in x-direction [m].

```
b
```
Total box length in y-direction [m].

```
L
```
Total box length in z-direction [m].

```
E
```
Electric field strength [V/m].

The **E** field generated by this element is given by:       = otherwise , , if ˆ

```
L
b
a
E
```
*z* *y* *z* **E**

### 4.5.5 Linecharge

```
linecharge(ECS,L,lambda) ;
```
Line with homogeneous charge density.

```
ECS
```
Element Coordinate System.

```
L
```
Total line length [m].

```
lambda
```
Line charge density [C/m].

The equation for the line is: = =* **y* ,

```
L
```
 *z*

The electric field generated by this element is given by: ( )         − + + − =  − ' ' grad

```
L
L
```
*dz* *z* *z* *y*   **E** where the integral and gradient are calculated analytically.

### 4.5.6 Platecharge

```
platecharge(ECS,a,b,sigma) ;
```
Rectangular plate with homogeneous charge density.

```
ECS
```
Element Coordinate System.

```
a
```
Total plate length in x-direction [m].

```
b
```
Total plate length in y-direction [m].

```
sigma
```
Surface charge density [C/m2].

The equation for the plate is: = *z* ,

```
a
```
 ,

```
b
```
 *y*

The electric field generated by this element is given by: ( ) ( )         + − + − − =  − − ' ' ' ' grad

```
a
a
b
b
```
*dx* *dy* *z* *y* *y*   **E** where the integral and gradient are calculated analytically.

### 4.5.7 Pointcharge

```
pointcharge(ECS,Q) ;
```
Pointcharge at the origin.

```
ECS
```
Element Coordinate System.

```
Q
```
Charge in Coulomb.

The electric field generated by this element in spherical coordinates is given by: **r** **r** **E** 

```
Q
```
=

### 4.5.8 pointchargeset

```
pointchargeset(set,theta) ;
```
Electrostatic field of a point charge distribution, calculated with the Barnes-Hut tree algorithm [9,10].

```
set
```
Particle set

```
theta
```
Overall accuracy parameter. The typical range is from 0.3 (publication quality) to 1.0 (quick and dirty).

The main use of `pointchargeset` is to specify a fixed particle set, such as an ion background while tracking electrons. All particles in the specified set are removed from the tracking and internally stored as a fixed electrostatic field.

For efficiency reasons, the Barnes&Hut hierarchical tree method is used to calculate the combined field. This method allows a tradeoff between speed and accuracy, governed by the `theta` parameter. Please see the analogous element `spacecharge3Dtree` in section 4.8.2 for a more detailed description.

To avoid singularities, it is important to set the smoothing length `R` of the particles. The current implementation only allows identical radii:

```
setrmacrodist(set,"u",R,0)

```
Static magnetic fields
