## 4.6 Static magnetic fields

This section contains elements that model static magnetic fields.

4.6.1 Barmagnet
4.6.2 Bmultipole
4.6.3 Bzsolenoid
4.6.4 Isectormagnet
4.6.5 Linecurrent
4.6.6 Magline
4.6.7 Magplate
4.6.8 Magdipole
4.6.9 Magpoint
4.6.10 Quadrupole
4.6.11 Rectcoil
4.6.12 Rectmagnet
4.6.13 Sectormagnet
4.6.14 Sextupole
4.6.15 Solenoid

The elements `magpoint`, `magline` and `magplate` calculate a **B** field as if magnetic charge were present. They can be convenient in a simulation, but should be used with caution because magnetic charge does not exist. The **B** field generated by a monopole is assumed to be [11]: **r** **r** **B**  *P* = with *P* the magnetic pole strength. The fields of the magnetic line charge m and surface charge m are derived analogue to the electrical case.

The magnetic scalar potential  is defined such that **B**=–grad() analogous to the electrical case.

### 4.6.1 Barmagnet

```
barmagnet(ECS,a,b,L,B) ;
```
Rectangular magnet modeled as two plates with opposite magnetic charge density.

```
ECS
```
Element Coordinate System.

```
a
```
Magnet length in x-direction [m].

```
b
```
Magnet length in y-direction [m].

```
L
```
Magnet length in z-direction [m].

```
B
```
Nominal magnetic field [T].

Figure 4-5: Typical **B** field in the x-z- and y-z-plane. The **B** field generated by this element can be written as the field of two identical plates with opposite magnetic surface charge density. The plates are located at:

```
a
```
 ,

```
b
```
 *y* ,

```
L
```
 = *z* . with corresponding surface charge density:

 

```
B
```
 = *m*

Within the magnet {0,0,`B`} is added to the magnetic field to convert the **H** field to a **B** field.

For the magnetic field generated by a rectangular plate with homogeneous magnetic surface charge density see `magplate`, section 4.6.7.

### 4.6.2 Bmultipole

```
Bmultipole(ECS,zlen, Bdipole,Bdl,Bb1, Gquadrupole,Gdl,Gb1,
  Hsextupole,Hdl,Hb1, Ooctupole,Odl,Ob1) ;
```
Generic magnetic multipole with fringe fields

```
ECS

zlen
```
Length of element

```
Bdipole
```
Nominal dipole field [T]. Normally this is `m`c/`qR`.

```
Bdl
```
Dipole fringe field offset for the entry and exit planes [m] to change the effective length.

```
Bb1
```
First coefficient of the dipole fringe Enge function [m–1]. Must be nonzero.

```
Gquadrupole
```
Nominal quadrupole gradient [T/m].

```
Gdl
```
Quadrupole fringe field offset for the entry and exit planes [m].

```
Gb1
```
First coefficient of the quadrupole fringe Enge function [m–1].

```
Hsextupole
```
Nominal sextupole gradient [T/m2].

```
Hdl
```
Sextupole fringe field offset for the entry and exit planes [m].

```
Hb1
```
First coefficient of the sextupole fringe Enge function [m–1].

```
Ooctupole
```
Nominal octupole gradient [T/m3].

```
Odl
```
Sextupole fringe field offset for the entry and exit planes [m].

```
Ob1
```
First coefficient of the sextupole fringe Enge function [m–1].

This element models a generic magnetic multipole based on 7th order expansion around the *z*-axis, including fringe fields. The field-profile on-axis for each of the multipole-components is assumed to be a first-order Enge function as function of *z* of the form: ( ) ( )       − + + + = + − + + − − )1 , , , ; ( ) ( ) ( *dl* *L* *z* *b* *dl* *L* *z* *b* *e* *e* *A* *b* *dl* *A* *L* *z* *f* where *A* is the overall amplitude, *L* the length of the element, *dl* a correction tem for the length and *b1* a measure for the inverse steepness of the fringes. The amplitude, length correction and steepness can be individually specified for each multipole-component, as documented in the parameter list. For example, the quadrupole component has an on-axis gradient in [T/m] given by *f*(*z*,`L`,`Gquadrupole`,`Gdl`,`gb1`).

Implemented is a 7th order expansion for the magnetic potential *V* given by: ) sin( ) ( ) (  *n* *m* *r* *z* *c* *z* *V* *m* *n* *m* *nm*  = = = where ) , arctan( *y* *y* *r* = + = 

and where *V* *B*  = .

Maxwell equation requiring ) ( *r* *O* *B* =  and the given parameters are used to uniquely construct the *c*nm(*z*) coefficients. This yields:

Static magnetic fields

) ('' ) ( ) ('' ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ('' ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ('' ) ( ) ('' ) ( ) , , ; , ( ) ( ) , , ; , ( ) ( ) , , ; , ( ) ( ) , , ; , ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( = − = − = + = + = + = − = − = − = − = = = = = *z* *c* *z* *c* *z* *c* *z* *c* *z* *c* *z* *c* *z* *c* *z* *c* *z* *c* *z* *c* *z* *c* *z* *c* *z* *c* *z* *c* *z* *c* *z* *c* *z* *c* *z* *c* *z* *f* *z* *c* *z* *f* *z* *c* *z* *f* *z* *c* *z* *f* *z* *c*

### Ob1 Odl

### Ooctupole L

### Hb1 Hdl

### Hsextupole L

### Gb1 Gdl

### e Gquadrupol

### L Bb1

### Bdl Bdipole

### L

A graphical representation of the fields, in the fringe region at *z*=`L`/2, is shown in the figures below. The color-scale ranges from blue, via green and yellow, to red. This scale is set individually for each plot, so the plots cannot be compared in absolute value.

Figure 4-6: Dipole fields for the *B*x, *B*y and *B*z components respectively in the fringe region.

Figure 4-7: Quadrupole fields for the *B*x, *B*y and *B*z components respectively in the fringe region.

Figure 4-8: Sextupole fields for the *B*x, *B*y and *B*z components respectively in the fringe region.

Figure 4-9: Octupole fields for the *B*x, *B*y and *B*z components respectively in the fringe region.

### 4.6.3 Bzsolenoid

```
bzsolenoid(ECS,R,L,nI) ;
```
A homogeneous solenoid without thickness approximated as circular current sheet.

```
ECS
```
Element Coordinate System.

```
R
```
Radius of the solenoid [m].

```
L
```
Solenoid length [m].

```
nI
```
Ampere turns per meter [A].

The fields generated by this element in cylindrical coordinates are: ( )   ( )   ( )   ( )   =         + − − + + − =         + − − − + + + =    *B* *z* *z* *r* *B* *z* *z* *z* *z* *B* *r* *z*

```
R
nI
R
L
R
L
nI
R
L
L
R
L
L

```
The fields generated are only correct near the **z**-axis of the element.

### 4.6.4 Isectormagnet

```
isectormagnet(fromCCS,toCCS,[finalCCS],R,Bfield,Bdl,Bb1,Gquadrupole,Gdl,Gb1,
  Hsextupole,Hdl,Hb1) ;
```
A sectormagnet with optional quadrupole and sextupole components, including fringe fields.

```
fromCCS
```
Name of the CCS the particles start on.

```
toCCS
```
Name of the CCS the particles are bended to.

```
finalCCS
```
Optional name of the CCS where to position the magnet.

```
R
```
Radius of the bend [m].

```
Bfield
```
Nominal dipole field [T]. Normally this is `m`c/`qR`.

```
Bdl
```
Dipole fringe field offset for the entry and exit planes [m] to change the effective length.

```
Bb1
```
First coefficient of the dipole fringe Enge function [m–1]. Must be nonzero.

```
Gquadrupole
```
Nominal quadrupole gradient [T/m].

```
Gdl
```
Quadrupole fringe field offset for the entry and exit planes [m].

```
Gb1
```
First coefficient of the quadrupole fringe Enge function [m–1].

```
Hsextupole
```
Nominal sextupole gradient [T/m2].

```
Hdl
```
Sextupole fringe field offset for the entry and exit planes [m].

```
Hb1
```
First coefficient of the sextupole fringe Enge function [m–1].

This element models a sectormagnet based on 7th order multipole expansion along a curved trajectory. The position of the magnet is given by the intersection of `fromCCS` and `toCCS`, fully analogous to a normal `sectormagnet` element. The radius of curvature for the nominal `Bfield` is assumed to be `R`. The inverse steepness of the fringe fields can be adjusted with the `Bb1` parameter, and an offset of the entry and exit planes can be specified using `Bdl`. Independent on the dipole component, a quadrupole and sextupole

Static magnetic fields component can be specified using using `Gquadrupole`, `Gb1` and `Gdl` for the quadrupole and `Hsextupole`, `Hb1` and `Hdl` for the sextupole component.

To describe the fields of this element, a toroidal coordinate system is used where a circle in the *xz*-plane, represented as (*r*,θ) is centered at offset *R* and rotated around the z-axis over toroidal angle φ. Consequently: ( ) ) , arctan( ) , arctan( *y* *z* *R* *y* *z* *R* *y* *r* = − + = + − + =  

This specific coordinate system is chosen because it can be positioned in 3D space such that particles travelling through a curved trajectory with radius *R* will always have very small *r* coordinates. This allows a multipole expansion in *r* to approximate off-axis fields.

The field-profile on-axis for the dipole, quadrupole and sextupole components of this element is assumed to be a first-order Enge function as function of *φ* of the form: ( ) ( )       − + + + = + − + + − − )1 , , , ; ( ) / ( ) / ( *R* *dl* *L* *b* *R* *R* *dl* *L* *b* *R* *e* *e* *A* *b* *dl* *A* *L* *f*    where *A* is the overall amplitude, *L* the length of the element in radians, *dl* a correction tem for the length and *b1* a measure for the inverse steepness of the fringes. The amplitude, length correction and steepness can be individually specified for each multipole-component, as documented in the parameter list. For example for the quadrupole component has an on-axis gradient in [T/m] given by *f*(*φ*,`L`,`Gquadrupole`,`Gdl`,`gb1`).

The fields are implemented is a 7th order expansion for the magnetic potential *V* given by: ) sin( ) ( ) (    *n* *m* *r* *c* *V* *m* *n* *m* *nm*  = = = where  = = −           + + − − − =  = ) sin( )) cos( ) cos( ) sin( ) sin( ( ) ( ) sin( ) cos( ) (' ) sin( )) cos( ) sin( ) sin( ) cos( ( ) ( ) sin( ) sin( ) (' ) cos( )) cos( ) sin( ) sin( ) cos( ( ) ( *n* *m* *nm* *nm* *nm* *nm* *nm* *m* *n* *n* *n* *m* *c* *n* *r* *c* *n* *n* *n* *m* *c* *n* *r* *c* *n* *n* *n* *m* *c* *m* *r* *V* *B*                            

and ) cos(  *r* *R* + = .

The dipole, quadrupole and sextupole components, *c*11, *c*22 and *c*33 respectively, are defined by the following expressions as function of toroidal angle φ: ) , , ; , ( ) ( ) , , ; , ( ) ( ) , , ; , ( ) (

```
Hb1
Hdl
Hsextupole
L
Gb1
Gdl
e
Gquadrupol
L
Bb1
Bdl
Bdipole
L
```
*z* *f* *c* *z* *f* *c* *z* *f* *c* = = =   

These expressions are identical the on-axis fringe fields of a normal sectormagnet, and also identical to the on-axis gradient of a quadrupole with analytical fringes. The other multipole components along the curved trajectory are uniquely defined up to *n*th order by requiring that the Laplacian of the magnetic potential is zero up-to *n*th order in *r*. Consequently: ( ) ( ) ( ) ( )  = = − − − + − − − =  ) sin( ) ('' ) sin( ) sin( ) cos( ) ( *n* *m* *nm* *nm* *m* *n* *r* *c* *n* *R* *m* *m* *n* *m* *n* *nr* *c* *m* *r* *B*          must vanish up-to *n*th order for all θ. This yields:

( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( )) ( ) ( ) ('' ) ('' ) ('' ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ('' ) ('' ) ('' ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ('' ) ('' ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ('' ) ('' ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ('' ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) (                             *Rc* *c* *c* *R* *Rc* *c* *c* *R* *Rc* *R* *c* *c* *R* *Rc* *c* *c* *R* *Rc* *R* *c* *c* *Rc* *c* *c* *R* *Rc* *R* *c* *Rc* *c* *c* *R* *Rc* *R* *c* *c* *Rc* *R* *c* + − + − + − = − + − + − = + + − + − = − + − = + − =

The remaining *c*46, *c*17, *c*37 and *c*77 coefficients are not particularly illuminating apart from the fact that derivatives of increasing order are used, that *n*<*m* and that *n*+*m* is always even.

Particles are removed from the simulations when they are far outside the convergence range of the power series. This happens when *r* *b1*>π.

##### 4.6.4.1 Example The following example visualizes a 90° indexed

sectormagnet with and without field-index: 1.

```
Rbend = 1 ;
```
2.

```
beta = 0.99 ;
```
3.

```
gamma = 1/sqrt(1-beta^2) ;
```
4.

```
Bfield = -me*c*gamma*beta/(qe*Rbend) ;
```
5.

6.

```
angle = pi/2 ;
```
7.

```
ccs("wcs",0,0,2, cos(angle),0,-sin(angle),0,1,0, "ccs") ;
```
8.

```
sectormagnet_indexed("wcs","ccs","wcs",Rbend, Bfield,0.0,30, .05,0,30, 0,0,0) ;
9. setparticles("beam",100000,me,qe,0) ;
setxdist("beam","u",0.5,1.5) ;
setzdist("beam","u",1.5,1.5) ;
tout(0) ;

```
*B*y component of the field, without (left) and with (right) field-index.

### 4.6.5 Linecurrent

```
linecurrent(ECS, x1,y1,z1, x2,y2,z2, I) ;
```
Straight line segment.

```
ECS
```
Element Coordinate System.

```
x1,y1,z1
```
Start position of the line [m].

```
x2,y2,z2
```
End position of the line [m].

```
I
```
Current through the line [A].

Static magnetic fields

The line runs from (*x*1,*y*1,*z*1) to (*x*2,*y*2,*z*2). The current flows from the starting point of the line to the endpoint.

The field of this element is calculated in a frame in which the **z**-direction is parallel to the line segment and the origin is chosen to be the center point of the line. In this new coordinate system, the magnetic field generated by this element is given by: / / ) ( ) ( ) ( ,0,0 *z* *z* *y* *y* *L* *dz* *z* *y* *L* *z* *L* *z* − + − + − =         + +   =  + −  

```
I
```
**B** where the integral and curl are calculated analytically.

### 4.6.6 Magline

```
magline(ECS,L,lambda) ;
```
Line with homogeneous magnetic charge density.

```
ECS
```
Element Coordinate System.

```
L
```
Total line length [m].

```
lambda
```
Magnetic line charge density [A].

The equation for the line is: = =* **y* ,

```
L
```
 *z*

The magnetic field generated by this element is given by: ( )         − + + − =  − ' ' grad

```
L
L
```
*dz* *z* *z* *y*    **B** where the integral and gradient are calculated analytically.

### 4.6.7 Magplate

```
magplate(ECS,a,b,sigma) ;
```
Rectangular plate with homogeneous magnetic charge density.

```
ECS
```
Element Coordinate System.

```
a
```
Total plate length in x-direction [m].

```
b
```
Total plate length in y-direction [m].

```
sigma
```
Magnetic surface charge density [A/m].

The equation for the plate is: = *z* ,

```
a
```
 ,

```
b
```
 *y*

The magnetic field generated by this element is given by: ( ) ( )         + − + − − =  − − ' ' ' ' grad

```
a
a
b
b
```
*dx* *dy* *z* *y* *y*    **B** where the integrals and gradient are calculated analytically.

### 4.6.8 Magdipole

```
magdipole(ECS, m) ;
```
Magnetic mathematical dipole.

```
ECS
```
Element Coordinate System.

```
m
```
Magnetic dipole moment [A m2].

This element models a mathematical magnetic dipole, located at the origin and aligned with the z-axis. The magnetostatic field is given by:

( )  

```
m
m
m
```
ˆ ˆ ˆ ˆ −        = *r* *r* *r* *B*  

### 4.6.9 Magpoint

```
magpoint(ECS,P) ;
```
Magnetic pointcharge at the origin.

```
ECS

P
```
Magnetic charge [Am].

The magnetic field generated by this element in spherical coordinates is given by: **r** **r** **B**  `P` =

### 4.6.10 Quadrupole

```
quadrupole(ECS,L,Go,[b1]) ;
```
Magnetostatic quadrupole with optional 3D fringe fields

```
ECS
```
Element coordinate system.

```
L
```
Effective length of the quadrupole [m].

```
Go
```
Nominal magnetic field gradient [T/m].

```
b1
```
First coefficient of the fringe fields Enge function [1/m], roughly π/rbore.

Figure 4-10: Magnetic field in the xy-plane and corresponding scalar potential. This element models a magnetostatic quadrupole with effective length `L`, gradient `Go`, and a transverse size of approximately π/`b1`. The field equations are fully 3D and Maxwell compatible, as described by Bruno Muratori and coworkers 12. Because the fields are continuously differentiable they allow for much faster tracking compared to a hard-edged approximation.

The fields close to the axis are a normal quadrupole field:           = ) ( ) ( *z* *G* *y* *z* *G* **B** where the gradient *G(z)* is given by the superposition of two Enge functions: ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) *z* *z* *e* *e* *z* *G* *L* *z* *b* *L* *z* *b* + + − =       − + + + = − + − −

```
L
b1
L
b1
Go
Go
```
tanh tanh ) (

The shape of *G*(*z*) is a flat-top distribution in the range

```
L
L
```
  − *z* with amplitude `Go`, smoothed by convolution such that a) the effective length remains the same, b) the fields drops exponentially to zero outside the magnet and c) the final 3D expressions for the fields can be implemented efficiently. The

Static magnetic fields steepness of the edges is defined by the `b1` parameter, in units of [1/m]. The larger `b1`, the smaller the transverse size of the magnet and the steeper the edges.

The best way to obtain `b1` is by fitting the above equation to measured or simulated field data. However, from the 3D-case described below it will be seen that there is a field-singularity at the entrance and at the exit of the magnet at *r*=π/`b1`. This corresponds to the physical size of the magnet and a good approximation for `b1` is therefore `b1`≈π/rbore with *r*bore the inner size of the magnet. If a level of precision is required that makes it impossible to select an appropriate `b1` we recommend switching to the `map3D_B` element.

Particles further off-axis than π /b1 are removed from the simulation to prevent numerical problems near the field singularities. This should not pose any problems because this is within the physical magnet and particles should not be there. Furthermore, we choose to implement the equations such that the field-singularity is as far off-axis as theoretically possible given the chosen shape of *G*(*z*).

A quadrupole with a transverse size larger than its longitudinal length can also be simulated: All equations remain the same, but the gradient just never reaches `Go`. Nevertheless, the focusing strength remains the same because    −  = *Go* *L* *dz* *z* *G* ) ( regardless of the choice of `L` and `b1`. This is not surprising once we realize that *G*(*z*) can be written as the convolution of a flat-top distribution and hyperbolic-secant-like distribution with unit area: ( ) ) cosh( ) H( ) H( ) ( *z* *z* *z* *z* *G*

```
b1
b1
L
L
Go
```
+  + − = where H(z) is the Heaviside step function and the area of the smoothening function    = + - dz ) cosh( *z*

```
b1
b1

```
The full 3D Maxwell compatible field of `quad_fringe` are given by:

( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( )          − − − − − − + − − − + −  − =           ) ( , , ) ( , , ) ( , , ) ( , , ) ( , , ) ( , , z fringe, z fringe, y fringe, y fringe, fringe, fringe, *L* *z* *y* *B* *L* *z* *y* *B* *L* *z* *y* *B* *L* *z* *y* *B* *L* *z* *y* *B* *L* *z* *y* *B* *B* *B* *B* *z* *y*

```
b1
b1
b1
b1
b1
b1
b1
b1
b1
b1
b1
b1
b1
b1
b1
b1
b1
b1
b1
```
**G** where:                   + + + + +       + − − − + +       + − − − = − − ) cosh( ) cos( ) sin( ) cosh( ) cos( ) sin( ) cosh( ) cos( ) sinh( ) cos( ) sin( arctan ) cosh( ) cos( ) sinh( ) cos( ) sin( arctan ) , , ( fringe *z* *y* *y* *z* *y* *z* *y* *z* *e* *z* *z* *y* *y* *e* *y* *y* *z* *y* *z* *z* **B**

To maintain backward compatibility with GPT version 3.2 it is possible to omit the `b1` parameter. In that case an unrealistic hard-edged quadrupole is created with fields given by: ( ) otherwise if 0, , 1** L**  = *z* *y* *B*

```
G
G

```
Despite the fact that these fields might look much easier to calculate, they are not: The discontinuous fields stall the 5th order Runge Kutta solver of GPT resulting in much longer tracking times. For simulations where a high accuracy is required the difference can easily exceed an order of magnitude.

### 4.6.11 Rectcoil

```
rectcoil(ECS,r1,r2,L,I) ;
```
Homogeneous solenoid with length and thickness.

```
ECS
```
Element Coordinate System.

```
r1
```
Inner radius of the coil [m].

```
r2
```
Outer radius of the coil [m].

```
L
```
Length of the coil [m].

```
I
```
Total current through the coil [A].

To calculate the field on-axis the field of a single current loop is integrated in both the *z-* and *r*-direction: *dr* *dz* *z* *r* *r* *I* *r* *z* *B* *a* *z* *a* *z* + − + =

```
r2
r1
```
3) (2 ) , (  where *a*=`L`/2.

The field off-axis is approximated using a 4th-order power series expansion [13]. ''' ' '''' '' ) ( ) ( ) , ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) , ( *r* *z* *B* *r* *z* *B* *r* *z* *B* *r* *z* *B* *r* *z* *B* *z* *B* *r* *z* *B* *r* *z* + − = + − =

The fields are only correct near the **z**-axis of the element.

### 4.6.12 Rectmagnet

```
rectmagnet(ECS,a,b,Bfield,dl,b1,b2);
```
Rectangular magnet with fringe fields.

```
ECS

a
```
Length of the magnet in *x*-direction [m].

```
b
```
Length of the magnet in *z*-direction [m].

```
Bfield
```
Maximum magnetic field [T].

```
dl
```
Fringe field offset for the magnet’s entry and exit planes [m] to change the effective length.

```
b1
```
First coefficient of the fringe fields Enge function [m–1]. A value of 0 disables fringe fields.

```
b2
```
Second order coefficient of the fringe fields Enge function [m–2]. Typically 0.

This element models a rectangular magnet with a magnetic field-component `Bfield` in the *y*-direction in the region –½`a`<*x*<½`a` and –½`b`<*z*<–½`b`, see Figure 4-11.

```
b
a
```
z

Figure 4-11: Geometry of rectmagnet. The entrance and exit sides, assuming the *z*-direction as propagation direction of the particles, have fringe fields analogous to the fringe fields of the `sectormagnet` element. A reasonable estimate for `b``1` is 2/*gap*, and we recommend a zero value for both `dl` and `b``2`. Please see the documentation of the `sectormagnet` element for a detailed description of the fringe fields.

### 4.6.13 Sectormagnet

```
sectormagnet(fromCCS,[finalCCS],toCCS,R,Bfield,[phiin,phiout,dl,b1,b2]);
```
Sector magnet with options for rotated pole faces and fringe fields.

```
fromCCS
```
Name of the CCS the particles start on.

```
finalCCS
```
Name of the CCS where to position the magnet.

```
toCCS
```
Name of the CCS the particles are bended to.

```
R
```
Radius of the bend [m].

```
Bfield
```
Maximum magnetic field [T] in the negative y-direction. Normally this is `m`c/`qR`.

Static magnetic fields

```
phiin
```
Angle of incident pole face [rad]. Specify 0 for normal incidence.

```
phiout
```
Angle of exit pole face [rad]. Specify 0 for normal incidence.

```
dl
```
Fringe field offset for the magnet’s entry and exit planes [m] to change the effective length.

```
b1
```
First coefficient of the fringe fields Enge function [m–1]. A value of 0 disables fringe fields.

```
b2
```
Second order coefficient of the fringe fields Enge function [m–2]. Typically 0.

This element models a bending magnet with a **B** field perpendicular to the **z**-directions of both the `fromCCS` and `toCCS` coordinate systems. The geometry is that of a wedge with the two straight sides perpendicular to the **z**-directions of the specified coordinate systems. When the **z**-axes do not intersect, or when they are parallel, this element can not be used. Please use the isectorbent element to model an indexed sectorbend, i.e. a sectorbent with a quadrupole component.

The optional `phiin` and `phiout` parameters can be used to specify the angle (with respect to normal incidence) of the input and output pole faces in the bending plane. A positive angle means that the total angle of the ‘wedge’ will decrease. This is shown schematically in Figure 4-12.

```
fromCCS
toCCS
R
phiin
phiout

```
Figure 4-12: Geometry of the sectormagnet, with positive values for `phiin` and `phiout`. The fringe fields are modeled as a second order Enge function, given on-axis by [14] ( ) 2) ( ) ( exp ) , (

```
dl
b
dl
b
```
− + − + = = *z* *z* *y* *z* *B**y* in the coordinate system shown in Figure 4-13. The parameter `dl` changes the effective length of the magnet, while `b``1` affects the steepness of the drop-off of the magnetic field. The second order correction, given by parameter `b``2`, is implemented but should be used with care as it can reverse the field drop-off at a distance far away from the magnet.

Typical By field on-axis Particles are removed here Particles are removed here

```
dl
y
z
z=0
gap

```
Figure 4-13: Fringe fields of the sectormagnet. GPT removes all particles outside the gap region from the simulation. This is at a distance

```
b
```
/   *y* . There are a number of ways to obtain the parameters `dl`, `b``1` and `b``2`. Arguably the best method is to fit equation (1) to a measured field-profile of the magnet to be simulated. Second best is to use the ‘field integral’ FINT, such as used in MAD, and given by:

( )  − =  = *ds* *B* *s* *B* *B* *s* *B* *g* *y* *y* ) ( ) ( FINT

```
b

```
where *B*0 is the nominal field inside the magnet in [T] and *g* the gap of the dipole in [m]. If everything else fails, a reasonable average value for `b``1` is 2/*gap*. As mentioned before, we recommend a zero value for `b``2`.

The normal use of the `sectormagnet` element is that the specified `radius` of the bend is the ‘effective radius’, based on the magnetic properties of the magnet. In that case, the `dl` parameter is (almost) zero and in any case far smaller than the size of the gap. To ease interpretation of the simulation results, `dl` can be used to fine-tune the magnet such that the particles exist the magnet exactly on-axis. If on the other hand the `radius` parameter is based on the physical dimensions of the magnet, than the `dl` parameter should be used to specify how far the fringe fields extend out of the magnet. This is typically in the order of the size of the gap. In that case, the correct value for `dl` is approximated by:  − = *ds* *s* *B* *s* *B**y* ) H( ) (

```
dl

```
where H(*s*) is the Heaviside unit step function.

To disable fringe-field calculations, both `b` parameters must be specified as 0. This is not recommended, as it slows down simulation speed considerably due to the resulting discontinuous field, especially in combination with space-chare calculations.

The full expression for the magnetic field used in this element are given by [15]. ( ) ( ) *f* *f* *f* *z* *f* *f* *f* *y* *e* *h* *e* *h* *e* *B* *B* *e* *h* *e* *h* *e* *B* *B* ) cos( ) sin( ) cos( ) cos( + + = + + + − = with ) ( *y* *z* *z* *f* − + =

```
b
b
```
 and ) ( *z* *y* *h*

```
b
```
`b` + = .

We realize that fringe fields exist in all kinds of shapes and forms, and that these expressions model only a limited number of actual fields. On the other hand, it is our experience that the exact shape of the fringe fields does in many cases not affect the overall simulation results significantly. If needed, accurate modeling of all different shapes is possible with the `map3D_B` element in combination with an external field solver. In that case, the `CCSflip` element might be needed to ‘manually’ move the particles from one coordinate system to the other.

##### 4.6.13.1 Coordinate systems Apart from position and momentum coordinates,

particles in a GPT simulations also hold a reference to a coordinate system. By default this starts at `"wcs"`, the so-called World Coordinate System. Only beamline components specified relative to the particle’s coordinate system are visible to the particles and all other beamline components are ignored. Only two elements can transfer particles from one coordinate system to another coordinate system: `sectormagnet` and `ccsflip`. Usually the built-in coordinate system transfer of a `sectormagnet` is exactly what is desired, but there are use-cases where it is conceptually easier to run the whole simulations in `wcs`. In that case `finalCCS` is an elegant way to accomplish this.

If `finalCCS` is not specified, half a bending magnet is constructed on the `fromCCS` and the other half on the `toCCS`. When a particle leaves one half of the bending magnet it is placed on the other coordinate system to go through the remaining part of the bend. Both half magnets are local elements and are not allowed to overlap other local elements.

In case `finalCCS` is specified, the fields remain the same but the entire magnet is positioned in the given coosrinate system, typically `"wcs"`.

##### 4.6.13.2 Example An example inputfile `sector.in` with two sectormagnets

in a half-chicane configuration is given below. Particles start in the origin of the `"wcs"`coordinate system. They are subsequently bent in the zx-plane onto the `"bend"` coordinate system using the first sectormagnet. The downstream second sectormagnet bends the particles in the opposite direction onto coordinate system `"straight"`, causing a total offset d=0.1 m. It is

Static magnetic fields crucial to get the sign of the B-field correct, as otherwise particles are -without warning- deflected in the wrong direction.

This example does not contain any additional elements, but these can easily be placed with respect to the `"wcs"`, `"bend"` or `"straight"` coordinate systems. Spacecharge effects can be added using the spacecharge3Dmesh element. Output is provided as snapshots, 20 ns apart in this case, and such output works well for plotting trajectories. In a later stage it is more useful to work with screen output, and the last line shows this as an example. Output is written when particles pass the z=1 m plane, as measured in the `"straight"` coordinate system. Without the last parameter, output is written relative to the default `"wcs"` coordinate system. This implies that the center of the bunch would be at x=0.1 m. Although technically correct, in most cases this is not desired. The extra `"straight"` as last parameter forces GPT to write output relative to the coordinate system after the last bend, having an average x of zero.

```
# GPT example inputfile for a half chicane

# --beam parameters--
  N=100 ;

# Number of particles
  zlen=0.5e-3 ;

# bunch length [m]
  R=1.0e-3 ;

# Bunch readius [m]
  gamma=30 ;

# Bunch energy []

# --position particles using particle sets--
  setparticles( "beam", N, me, qe, 0) ;
  setzdist("beam","g", 0, zlen,3,3 ) ;

```
```
# Gaussian longitudinal distribution
  setrxydist( "beam", "u", R/2,R ) ;

# Uniform radial distribution
  setphidist( "beam", "u", 0,2*pi ) ;

# Fill xy phase space
  setGdist( "beam", "g", gamma, 0,3,3) ;

# Fixed energy, no energy spread
# --sectormagnet parameters--
  Bfield=0.085 ;

```
```
# Magnetic field [T]
  angle=17 ;

# Bend angle [degrees]
  d=0.1 ;

# Parallel translation [m]
  phiin=4.3 ;

# Entrance pole face [degrees]
  phiout=4.34 ;

# Exit pole face [degrees]
  dl=-0.7e-3 ;

# Field extends
  b1=44 ;

# b1=2/gap, gap=45 mm
  b2=0 ;

# No second order effects
# --half chicane consisting of 2 sectormagnets--
  beta = sqrt(gamma*gamma-1)/gamma ;
  Rbend = -me*c*gamma*beta/(qe*Bfield) ; # Mind the SIGN!
  Lbend = d/sin(angle/deg) ;

  ccs("wcs" , 0,0,1, cos(angle/deg),0,-sin(angle/deg), 0,1,0, "bend") ;
  ccs("bend", 0,0,Lbend, cos(angle/deg),0, sin(angle/deg), 0,1,0, "straight") ;
  sectormagnet("wcs" ,"bend" , Rbend, Bfield, phiin/deg,phiout/deg, dl, b1, b2);
  sectormagnet("bend","straight", Rbend, Bfield, phiin/deg,phiout/deg, dl, b1, b2);

# --output--
  accuracy(6) ;
  ns = 1e-9 ;
  tout( 0*ns,20*ns,0.05*ns );
# screen("straight","I", 1, "straight") ;

```
Typical lines to run the above example are:

```
gpt -o sector.gdf sector.in
gdfa -o avgs.gdf sector.gdf time avgx avgy avgz avgG stdx stdy stdz stdG avgfBy
gdftrans -o traj.gdf sector.gdf time x y z

### 4.6.14 Sextupole

```
```
sextupole(ECS,L,G) ;
```
Hard edged sextupole lens.

```
ECS
```
Element Coordinate System.

```
L
```
Length of the sextupole [m].

```
G
```
Magnetic field gradient in [T/m2]. Please see the field-equations carefully, as our definition gives magnetic fields a factor of 2 stronger compared to other codes and analytical theory3.

Figure 4-14: Magnetic field in the xy-plane and corresponding scalar potential. The **B** field and scalar potential generated by this element are given: ( ) *y* *y* *G* *z* *y* *xy* otherwise if − =                   − = **B**

```
L
G

### 4.6.15 Solenoid

```
```
solenoid(ECS,R,I) ;
```
Single turn solenoid.

```
ECS
```
Element Coordinate System.

```
R
```
Radius of the solenoid [m]

```
I
```
Current through the solenoid [A].

Figure 4-15: Magnetic field in the xz-plane. The solenoid is modeled as a circle centered around the origin in the xy-plane with radius `R` carrying a current `I`. The resulting magnetic field is directed in the positive z-direction, within the current loop. The vector potential of the magnetic field is given in spherical coordinates by [16, pp. 117]: ( )  − + =          ) cos( ) sin( ) cos( , *d* *Rr* *r* *R* *IR* *r* *A*

3 As was brought to our attention by Dr. D. Dowell. For reasons of backward compatibility we can not change this element, but we advice to specify the gradient in the GPT inputfile as 0.5*Gsextupole to emphase the missing prefactor. We apologise for the inconvenience.

Static magnetic fields

The magnetic field is calculated from **A** **B**   = . The integral and rotation are calculated analytically.

As the field is defined everywhere and no approximations are made, this element is very useful to study aberrations in solenoid lens systems.
