## 4.8 Spacecharge

This section describes the built-in space-charge routines of GPT. Please see section 1.5 for a brief comparison between the different routines.

4.8.1 Spacecharge3Dmesh
4.8.2 spacecharge3Dtree
4.8.3 Spacecharge3D
4.8.4 Spacecharge3Dclassic
4.8.5 SetTotalCharge
4.8.6 Spacecharge2Dcircle
4.8.7 Setcharge2Dcircle
4.8.8 Spacecharge2Dline

It is possible to write new and/or more efficient space-charge models for specific situations. The procedure to develop such custom space-charge models is given in the GPT ProgrammerέΑβs Reference.

GPT uses the concept of macro-particles: Every particle in the simulations represents a (large) number of elementary particles. In the case of simulations of granularity/stochastic effects, every particle in the simulations must represent exactly one elementary particle. In other words, *Q*tot=*N┬╖q*, where *Q*tot is the total charge, *N* the number of particles and *q* the charge of an elementary particle. The simplest method is to set the total charge based on the number of particles (assuming electrons, and assuming `N` is defined elsewhere):

```
Qtot = N*qe ;
setparticles("beam",N,me,qe,Qtot)

```
Alternatively, it is possible to calculate the number of particles based on the total charge `Qtot` (assuming electrons, and assuming `Qtot` is defined elsewhere):

```
N = round(|Qtot/q|) ;
setparticles("beam",N,me,qe,Qtot)
```
where the` round()` function rounds towards the nearest integer and where `||` indicates the absolute value.

### 4.8.1 Spacecharge3Dmesh

```
spacecharge3Dmesh([option,parameter(s)],...) ;
```
Mesh-based 3D space-charge routine.

We would like to express our thanks to Dr Gisela P├╢plau from Rostock University, Germany for the development of the non-equidistant 3D multi-grid Poisson solver, tailor-made for this application.

##### 4.8.1.1 Syntax and options

The `sc3dmesh` element calculates 3D space-charge fields by solving PoissonέΑβs equations on a non- equidistant mesh adapted to the beam geometry. The model is very fast, allowing over a million particles to be tracked on a normal PC. The element scales almost linear with the number of particles in terms of CPU time. This element is not suitable for the simulation of the effect of short-range Coulomb interactions such as disorder induced heating. Please see section 4.8.2 for the correct approach for calculating point-to-point interactions.

The charge density is determined on a mesh in the rest frame of the bunch where no self-magnetic fields are present. A non-equidistant multi-grid technique is used to solve PoissonέΑβs equation to obtain the electrostatic potential. Interpolations and Lorentz transformations are used to transform the particle coordinates to the rest frame and to transform the calculated fields back to the laboratory frame.

Note: This element gives a poor estimate of the space-charge forces in bunches with a large energy spread, because particles still have relatively large velocities in the rest frame of the bunch. A warning is printed to inform the users when this is the case.

Option Parameter(s) Default Description

```
"RestMaxGamma"
Gmax
```
2.0 Triggers a warning when particles have a Lorentz factor larger than `Gmax` in the zero-momentum frame of the bunch.

Spacecharge

Option Parameter(s) Default Description

```
"MeshNtotal"
[Nx,Ny,Nz]

```
Use a total of `Nx`, `Ny` and `Nz` meshlines in the x-, y- and z-direction respectively to fill the bounding box.

```
"MeshNbunch"
Nx,Ny,Nz

```
Slice the particle bunch in `Nx`, `Ny` and `Nz` meshlines in the x-, y- and z-direction respectively. Additional meshlines are added in all directions to fill the bounding box.

```
"MeshNfac"
Alpha
```
Automatically determine the total number of meshlines in the bunch using the following equation:

```
"MeshNpow"
mpow
```
1/3 `Nx`=`Ny`=`Nz`=`alpha`**N*particles^`mpow`. Can be used in combination with `MeshNtotal` without parameters to specify the total number of meshlines in the bounding box instead of in the bunch.

```
"MeshAdapt"
Fn
```
0.5 Sets the mesh adaptivity. The meshing algorithm ensures that the maximum difference in distance between neighboring meshlines is always kept less than the specified `fn`.

```
"MemOvershoot"
n
```
Percentage of memory overhead consumed by the memory management scheme. If set to 0, all block memory management is disabled resulting in the lowest memory consumption at the cost of a significant increase in page faults and CPU time.

```
"MeshBoxSize"
Nstd
```
Sets the minimum size of the bounding box in units of standard deviation for each dimension.

```
"MeshBoxAccuracy"
macc
```
0.3 Sets the minimum size of the bounding box, as a fraction of the effect of image charges in the walls of the box.

```
"MeshMaxAspect"
A
```
ΎΓξ Enforces the maximum ratio between the largest and smallest mesh-spacing in each dimension to be less than `A`. Because this restriction is enforced by reducing the mesh adaptivity, using this option can result in a dramatic increase in the number of meshlines.

```
"SolverAcc"
Verror
```
0.01 Sets the accuracy of the multigrid Poisson solver.

```
"SolverMethod"

```
`"MGCG"` Sets the method of the Poisson solver to any of the options listed below.

```
"MG"

```
Multigrid algorithm.

```
"MGCG"

```
Multigrid preconditioned cg-algorithm.

```
"CG"

```
Preconditioned cg-algorithm.

```
"SOR"

```
Use SOR procedure, for comparisons only.

```
"SolverStartZero"

```
Start from zero potential. If not specified, the solver starts from the previously obtained solution if the mesh size equal to mesh size of previous step.

```
"Cathode"

```
Simulates a flat cathode plane by setting a dirichlet boundary condition at z=0. Truncates the bounding box at all negative z-coordinates.

```
"BoundaryOpen"

```
Use open boundary conditions.

```
"BoundaryXperiodic" Xsize

```
Use periodic boundary conditions in X. Not implemented yet.

```
"BoundaryYperiodic" Ysize

```
Idem in Y.

```
"BoundaryZperiodic" Zsize

```
Idem in Z.

Option Parameter(s) Default Description

```
"BoundaryXYpipe"
Xsise,Ysize
```
Use Dirichlet boundary conditions on a beam-pipe with elliptical cross section in the xy-plane. Work in progressέΑο

```
"Boundaries"
String
"DDD
DDD"
```
Specify boundary conditions for each boundary individually, as a string in the following order: xmin, xmax, ymin, ymax, zmin, zmax. Options are several combinations of έΑαDAOPENέΑβ, see section 4.8.1.8.

```
"BeamScale"
small,
large
```
10έΑΥ4 10+4 Enforces the bunch aspect-ratio between `small` and `large` using a linear coordinate transform. The electromagnetic fields are adapted accordingly, but results will be incorrect when feature sizes in the bunch with an aspect ratio outside the specified range are present.

```
"Fieldfactor"
scale
```
Multiplication factor for all fields.

```
"MeshBoxXYmax"
size

```
Limits the transverse size of the mesh to given `size`.

The typical use of the `sc3dmesh` element is to use the default settings:

```
sc3dmesh() ;

```
To overwrite any of the default settings, the name of the option must be specified followed by one or more parameters. For example, to set a fixed number of 33 meshlines in all directions, the following line must be used:

```
sc3dmesh("MeshNtotal",33,33,33) ;

```
The order of independent options is irrelevant. As a result, to combine a fixed number of meshlines with the simulation of a cathode plane at *z*=0, either one of the following lines can be used:

```
sc3dmesh("Cathode","MeshNtotal",33,33,33) ;
sc3dmesh("MeshNtotal",33,33,33, "Cathode") ;
```

##### 4.8.1.2 Introduction to the algorithms

The chosen algorithm for this space-charge model in GPT is a mesh-based Poisson solver in the rest frame of the bunch. First the bunch is transformed to the frame with no average momentum. In this rest frame, only electrostatic forces are present as long as the velocities in this frame are non-relativistic. The bunch length in the rest frame is longer by the Lorentz factor ΎΒπ.

Subsequently, a Cartesian mesh is generated in a box around the bunch. The distribution of the meshlines is non-equidistant and adapted to the projected charge density. To reduce the number of meshlines needed, an adaptive meshing technique is used. The purpose of this scheme is to both reduce έΑαwastedέΑβ CPU time in empty volume and reduce numerical errors by choosing more meshlines in regions with higher charge density.

The non-equidistant mesh is used to store an approximation of the charge density on the corners of the mesh. This information is obtained using a linear distribution of the charge of every particle over the eight corners of its enclosing meshbox.

The charge density on the mesh is fed into a Poisson solver to obtain the potential. A state-of-the-art multigrid Poisson solver has been constructed for the non-equidistant meshes described in subsection 4.8.1.8. It scales linearly in CPU time with the number of meshnodes. Selectable Dirichlet or open boundary conditions allow the simulation of bunches within pipes with rectangular cross section, bunches near a cathode and a bunch in open space.

The resulting potential is interpolated and differentiated using a 2nd order interpolation scheme to obtain the electric field in the rest frame of the bunch at all particle coordinates. This electric field is transformed back to the laboratory frame to obtain the electric and magnetic fields. The GPT kernel combines these fields with the external fields in the tracking engine.

The chosen algorithm implies that the velocity in the rest frame of the bunch is non-relativistic. This assumption is not always true for long bunches in the first stages of acceleration. Therefore, it is possible

Spacecharge that new electrons are emitted with an energy in the eV level while the front of the bunch has already been accelerated to relativistic velocities. This is a known limitation of the routine reducing the applicability.

##### 4.8.1.3 Rest frame The first step in calculating the

space-charge forces is the determination of a rest-frame velocity. This is the frame in which all particle velocities are (nearly) zero, resulting in an electrostatic field only. Because not all particles have equal velocity in a bunch with energy spread, a shared rest frame typically does not exist. The rest frame is then defined as the frame in which the total momentum is zero. The velocity ΎΒλo of this frame is defined by the average of all particle velocities, weighted by the Lorentz factor ΎΒπ: ΎΔξ ΎΔξ = = *o* *n* *n* ΎΒπ ΎΒπ ΎΒπ ΎΒπ **╬▓** **╬▓** **╬▓**

where *n*i is the number of elementary particles represented by the macro-particle *i*. The normalized momentum ΎΒπoΎΒλo and the Lorentz factor ΎΒπo of the rest frame are then given by: **╬▓** **╬▓** **╬▓** **╬▓** ΎΒπ ΎΒπ ΎΒπ + = έΙΤ = *o* *o* *o*

When there is energy spread, the velocity of the rest frame is identical to the average velocity only when all velocities are non-relativistic.

The particle coordinates **r**i are different in the rest frame, denoted with a prime. They are a factor ΎΒπ0 expanded in the direction of the velocity of the frame: // // ' ' ' **╬▓** **╬▓** **r** **r** **r** **r** **r** **r** **r** ΎΒπ ΎΒπ ΎΒπ ΎΒπ + ΎΔΩ + = ΎΔη ΎΔχ ΎΔφ ΎΔυ = = έΛξ έΛξ

The particle velocity **u**i hereby changes also: ( ) ( ) ΎΔ║ ΎΔ╗ ΎΔ╣ ΎΔς ΎΔτ ΎΔσ + ΎΔ╖ΎΔ╖ ΎΔ╕ ΎΔ╢ ΎΔπΎΔπ ΎΔρ ΎΔο έΙΤ + ΎΔΩ ΎΔΩ έΙΤ = ΎΔη ΎΔψ ΎΔψ ΎΔχ ΎΔψΎΔψ ΎΔφ ΎΔυ ΎΔΩ έΙΤ = ΎΔΩ έΙΤ = έΛξ έΛξ *u* *u* *u* *u* *u* *u* *u* *u* *u* *u* *c* **╬▓** **╬▓** **╬▓** **╬▓** **╬▓** **╬▓** **u** **╬▓** **╬▓** **u** **u** **╬▓** **╬▓** **u** **u** ΎΒπ ΎΒπ ΎΒπ ΎΒπ ΎΒπ ΎΒπ ΎΒπ ΎΒπ ΎΒπ ΎΒπ ΎΒπ // // ' ' '

ItέΑβs more convenient to use the Lorentz factor given by: ) 1( ' *u* *u* *u* ΎΒλ ΎΒλ ΎΒπ ΎΒπ ΎΒπ έΙΤ =

Ideally, all velocities in the rest frame are well below the speed of light. If this is not the case, a warning is printed counting the number of particles with a Lorentz factor ΎΒπuέΑβ larger than `Gmax`. The parameter `Gmax` can be set with the `"RestMaxGamma"` option.

##### 4.8.1.4 Bounding box To calculate the electromagnetic potential, a

Cartesian 3D mesh is used to store an estimate of the charge in the rest frame of the bunch. To solve the potential in free space, an infinite mesh is required. Because this is impractical, the actual mesh is truncated at a bounding box where the potential is assumed to be zero. The center of this bounding box is chosen as the average particle coordinate in the rest frame of the bunch. The effect of a bounding box (with Dirichlet boundary conditions) is similar to the effect of image charges.

Choosing a too large box is a waste of CPU time and memory, while choosing a too small box violates the assumption that the potential at the edges of the bounding box is zero. A combination of several options is available to set the correct size of the bounding box. The minimum size of the bounding box is always `nstd` times the standard deviation in each dimension, as can be set with the `"MeshBoxSize"` option. For low and high aspect ratio bunches this sets a too small box for the transverse and longitudinal dimensions respectively. The `"MeshBoxAccuracy"` option can be used to increase the box based on the maximum ratio of the actual fields divided by the fields produces by the image charges. This essentially makes the box sufficiently large to mimic a free space calculation. However, in extreme cases, this can set a mesh that is larger than the physical size of the beam pipe. This gives unphysical results and it is also a waste of CPU time to zero a large mesh. The `"MeshBoxXYmax"` option can be used to limit to maximum transverse size of the mesh that is used for the space-charge calculations. The size should be set to the actual size of the beam pipe where it should be noted that the pipe is assumed to have square cross section.

##### 4.8.1.5 Number of meshlines

The bounding box is divided by a number of Carthesian meshlines. The meshlines form the edges of rectangular boxes filling the calculation domain. As explained in subsequent sections, the corners of the boxes, the crossings of the meshlines, are used to store an estimate of the charge density and to calculate the electrostatic fields.

Figure 4-18 shows a schematic of a typical meshline distribution in one dimension. A number of meshlines within the bunch dimension, *N*bunch, are positioned more closely together where more charge is present. The lower and upper parts of the bounding box are filled with *N*low and *N*upp meshlines repectively, where the spacing between the meshlines gradually increases near the edge of the bounding box. The total number of meshlines is *N*total.

*N*bunch *N*low *N*upp *N*total + + =

Figure 4-18: One-dimensional schematic of a typical meshline distribution. By default, the number of meshlines in the bunch, *N*bunch, is equal in all directions and chosen as a function of the number of particles *N*:

```
mpow
```
`alpha`* N* *N** bunch* = where `alpha` and `mpow` can be set with the `"MeshNfac"` and `"MeshNpow"` options.

Alternatively, the number of meshlines slicing the bunch can be specified with the `"MeshNbunch"` option. Then, the number of meshlines in the bunch is fixed at `Nx`, `Ny` and `Nz` in the x-, y- and z-direction respectively and set independent on the number of particles in the bunch. In both cases, the space between the bunch and the edges of the bounding box is filled with as few additional meshlines as possible to save CPU and memory usage, see section 4.8.1.6.

A disadvantage of the options above is that an a-priori unknown number of meshlines are added to fill the bounding box. This can result in unpredictable memory usage and CPU time. To avoid this, the `"MeshNtotal"` option sets the total number of meshlines in the bounding box. When `"MeshNtotal"` is specified without further parameters, the total number of meshlines, *N*total, is equal in all directions and given by:

```
mpow
```
`alpha`* **N* *N** total* =

With parameters, the total number of meshlines is `Nx`, `Ny` and `Nz` in the x-, y- and z-direction respectively.

##### 4.8.1.6 Meshline positions The positioning of the meshlines is

an iterative process. To determine the position of the xέΑβ-lines, planes in the yz-plane, first a histogram of the xέΑβ-coordinates of the particles is created. To obtain a good trade-off between bin width and noise, the number of bins is taken equal to the square root of the number of particles, see Figure 4-19.

Spacecharge

Figure 4-19: Particle positions in the xy-plane and a corresponding x-histogram for a Gaussian charge-density distribution. 10,000 sample particles are used for a Gaussian distribution with ΎΒ│=1. The next step approximates the Cumulative Density Function (CDF) by integrating the histograms. To compensate for the fact that we use three projections to adapt the meshline spacing to the charge density, the cubic root of the height of the histograms is used. This typically broadens the distribution. The inverse of this CDF is used to map Nx equidistantly spaced points to Nx meshline positions following the beam density.

The above procedure, however, cannot be used directly because it allows very large differences in neighboring mesh intervals, creating a non-optimal meshline distribution for the Poisson solver described in section 4.8.1.8. Therefore, the `fn` parameter is introduced to restrict the difference in spacing between neighboring meshlines. When `fn` is 0.25, this means that the difference in spacing between neighboring meshlines cannot vary by more than 25%. As an example, any mesh spacing of 1 mm with `fn`=
0.25 enforces a spacing between
0.8 and
1.25 mm for its neighbours. The parameter `fn` can be set with the `"MeshAdapt"` option.

To span the mesh over the bounding box defined in section 4.8.1.4, additional meshlines are added left and right of the bunch. The spacing of these additional meshlines is increased towards the boundary, restricted to `fn`, to add as few lines as possible. If a fixed number of meshlines is chosen, the number of meshlines in the bunch decreases proportionally with the increase of meshlines between the edge of the bunch and the edge of the bounding box.

The addition of meshlines and the effect of `fn` is shown in **Error! Reference source not found.**H. W hen `fn`=0, the spacing between all neighboring meshlines is allowed to vary by 0%, creating an equidistant mesh. Such a mesh is most stable to solve for the Poisson solver, but it will create many empty meshboxes. On the other extreme, setting `fn`=0.5 results in dense sampling of the electron bunch and sparse sampling of the surrounding area.

##### 4.8.1.7 Charge on mesh

After the meshlines are positioned, the charge of all particles is distributed over the corners of the meshboxes using a trilinear interpolation technique. For every particle, the corresponding meshbox index (*n*x,*n*y,*n*z) is found by three separate bisection searches for the three dimensions. Then the relative distances *t*, *u* and *v* to the lower, left, bottom corner of the box are calculated from the meshlines positions *l*: -4 -3 -2 -1 -4 -3 -2 -1 y -4 -3 -2 -1 Counts

Figure 4-20: xy-meshline positions for a Gaussian charge density with `fn`=0 (top), `fn`=0.2 (middle) and `fn`=0.5 (bottom), with a bounding box of 5 sigma. The vertical axis shows the total charge in each meshbox, where the height of the top has been normalized in all plots individually.

( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( )) ( )1 ( / ) ( ) ( )1 ( / ) ( ) ( )1 ( / ) ( *z* *z* *z* *z* *z* *z* *y* *y* *y* *y* *y* *y* *n* *l* *n* *l* *n* *l* *z* *n* *l* *n* *l* *n* *l* *y* *u* *n* *l* *n* *l* *n* *l* *t* έΙΤ + έΙΤ = έΙΤ + έΙΤ = έΙΤ + έΙΤ =

The charge *Q*i of each particle *i* is distributed over all eight corners *Q*mesh(*n*x,*n*y,*n*z) of the enclosing meshbox as follows: *u* *t* *Q* *n* *n* *n* *Q* *u* *t* *Q* *n* *n* *n* *Q* *u* *t* *Q* *n* *n* *n* *Q* *u* *t* *Q* *n* *n* *n* *Q* *u* *t* *Q* *n* *n* *n* *Q* *u* *t* *Q* *n* *n* *n* *Q* *u* *t* *Q* *n* *n* *n* *Q* *u* *t* *Q* *n* *n* *n* *Q* *z* *y* *mesh* *z* *y* *mesh* *z* *y* *mesh* *z* *y* *mesh* *z* *y* *mesh* *z* *y* *mesh* *z* *y* *mesh* *z* *y* *mesh* = + + + έΙΤ = + + έΙΤ = + + έΙΤ έΙΤ = + έΙΤ = + + έΙΤ έΙΤ = + έΙΤ έΙΤ = + έΙΤ έΙΤ έΙΤ = )1 ,1 ,1 ( ) 1( ) ,1 ,1 ( ) 1( )1 , ,1 ( ) 1( ) 1( ) , ,1 ( )1 ( )1 ,1 , ( ) 1( )1 ( ) ,1 , ( ) 1( )1 ( )1 , , ( ) 1( ) 1( )1 ( ) , , (

##### 4.8.1.8 Solve potential The electrostatic potential *V* in the

rest frame of the bunch satisfies PoissonέΑβs equation: / ΎΒξ ΎΒ▓ = ΎΔΣ έΙΤ *V* in ΎΒΩ, where ΎΒ▓ is the charge density given in units of [C/m3] and ΎΒΩ denotes the bounding box explained in section 4.8.1.4.

Possible boundary conditions are: έΑαDέΑβ: Dirichlet boundary conditions with *V*=0 on ΎΒΩ ΎΓ╢ . έΑαAέΑβ: Dirichlet boundary conditions with an approximate value for the potential at the boundary based on the analytical expressions of a uniformly charged brick with equal RMS sizes. έΑαOέΑβ: Open boundary conditions, which describe the decay of the potential of the bunch and ensure that lim = ΎΓξ έΗΤ*V* *r* . έΑαPέΑβ: Periodic boundary condition. Not implemented yet. έΑαEέΑβ: Elliptical boundary condition. Work in progressέΑο έΑαNέΑβ: Neumann boundary condition with / = ΎΓ╢ ΎΓ╢ *n* *V* on ΎΒΩ ΎΓ╢ .

PoissonέΑβs equation is discretized by means of second-order finite differences. The generation of the underlying mesh is described in section 4.8.1.6. The resulting linear system of equations *mesh* *mesh* *Q* *AV* = is solved by means of a multigrid (MG) technique adapted to non-equidistant grids. A more detailed description of this solver can be found in [17, 18].

The input of the Poisson solver are the meshline positions and the charge on all meshnodes *Q*mesh(*n*x,*n*y,*n*z). The output is the potential on all meshnodes *V*mesh(*n*x,*n*y,*n*z).

Two multigrid schemes are implemented: The most stable algorithm is the multigrid preconditioned conjugate gradient method (MGCG) that is set as default. For saving CPU time it is possible to choose the plain MG algorithm for bunches with έΑαgoodέΑβ behavior:

```
sc3dmesh("SolverMethod","MG") ;

```
The number of multigrid iterations is determined by the option `"SolverAcc"` with the default setting 10έΑΥ2. That means for the relative residual , | | | | max max ) ( έΙΤ ΎΓμ έΙΤ *mesh* *mesh* *n* *mesh* *Q* *Q* *AV* where ) (*n* *mesh* *V* denotes the solution after *n* multigrid iterations. In our experience this solver accuracy suffices for most applications. A smaller number usually does not improve the result because all discretizations occurring in the simulation (this also applies to the tracking itself) restrict the accuracy that can be achieved. Furthermore the achievable accuracy is restricted by the noise that the charge density contains.

Spacecharge

In cases the multigrid Poisson solver does not provide acceptable results, or does not even converge, several parameters can be changed:

***Change the size of the bounding box *** In several cases enlarging the bounding box helps. This leads to a better approximation of the field near the surface of this bounding box (see section 4.8.1.4) in cases where the field of the bunch decays. If the potential of the bunch has a decay of at least as 1/r, the difference between simulations with Dirichlet or open boundaries is not essential. In case the stability of the algorithm turns out to be a problem Dirichlet boundary conditions should be preferred.

***Change the Poisson solver algoritnm *** Beside the multigrid algorithms two other Poisson solvers are implemented: A preconditioned conjugate gradient (CG) method with the diagonal of the matrix *A* as preconditioner and the SOR relaxation. The related commands are: `sc3dmesh("SolverMethod","CG"); `and `sc3dmesh("SolverMethod","SOR"); `respectively. Although both algorithms are much slower than the multigrid method (CG faster that SOR) they can be applied in order to verify that the problem is due to the solver (for instance no convergence).

***Change the discretization: *** Problems with the Poisson solver are mostly caused by the discretization. As already mentioned in section 4.8.1.6 large differences in neighboring step sizes can be the underlying reason. Furthermore, the global aspect ratio *h*max/*h*min must not be too large. A smaller value for `fn`, which controls the step sizes of the mesh, therefore improves the discretization of PoissonέΑβs equation, e.g. `sc3dmesh("MeshAdapt",0.2);`` ` Another possibility to verify the mesh is to vary the number of meshlines (see section 4.8.1.5). A general advice cannot be given because an appropriate choice very much depends on the characteristics of the application. Note that a larger number of meshlines specified with` ``"MeshNtotal"` usually provides an undesired larger aspect ratio!` `

##### 4.8.1.9 Interpolate EέΑβ from VέΑβ

The electric field in the rest frame of the bunch is given by the derivative of the potential: *V* έΙΤΎΔΣ ='**E**

Centered differencing and a trilinear interpolation scheme are used to calculate this derivative at all particle positions. First, for every particle, the procedure described in 4.8.1.7 is again used to find the enclosing meshbox index (*n*x,*n*y,*n*z). To obtain the x-component of the electric field, first the electric fields interpolated at the left and at the right sides of the box, trilinear interpolated to the yz-position of the particle, are calculated using centered differencing: ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ) ( ) ( )1 ( ) ( ) 1( )1 ( ) 1( ) ( ) )( 1( )1 ( ) ( ) 1( )1 ( ) 1( ) ( ) )( 1( )1 ( )1 ( )1 ( ) ( ) 1( )1 ( ) 1( ) ( ) )( 1( )1 ( ) ( ) 1( )1 ( ) 1( ) ( ) )( 1( , *right* *x,left* *n* *l* *n* *l* *,,* *V* *uv* *,,* *V* *u* *,* *,* *V* *u* *,* *,* *V* *u* *,,* *V* *uv* *,,* *V* *u* *,* *,* *V* *u* *,* *,* *V* *u* *E* *n* *l* *n* *l* *,,* *V* *uv* *,,* *V* *u* *,* *,* *V* *u* *,* *,* *V* *u* *,,* *V* *uv* *,,* *V* *u* *,* *,* *V* *u* *,* *,* *V* *u* *E* έΙΤ + + έΙΤ + έΙΤ + έΙΤ έΙΤ έΙΤ + έΙΤ + έΙΤ + έΙΤ έΙΤ = έΙΤ έΙΤ + + + + έΙΤ + + έΙΤ + + έΙΤ έΙΤ έΙΤ έΙΤ + έΙΤ έΙΤ + έΙΤ έΙΤ + έΙΤ έΙΤ έΙΤ =

The notation *V*(*a*,*b*,*c*) is used to represent the potential *V* at index (*n*x+*a*,*n*y+*b*,*n*z+*c*).

Linear interpolation is used to obtain the final x-component of the electric field at the particle position: *right* *left* *E* *t* *left* *E* *t* *E* , , ) 1( + έΙΤ έΙΤ =

The equations for the y- and z-components of the electric field are fully analogous.

##### 4.8.1.10 Aspect-ratio scaling Very low and very high aspect

ratio bunches are difficult to simulate with the described mesh-based space- charge routine. For relatively uniform bunches, an option to increase the accuracy is to multiply the particle coordinates in one dimension such that the aspect ratio of the bunch falls in the range between 0.01 and 100.

Very high aspect ratio bunches (*A*>100) have nearly identical fields when the total charge is constant. From a physical point of view this is clear, because in the έΑαpancakeέΑβ regime the bunch behaves as a surface charge and the precise thickness of this surface does not affect the fields. As a result, it is safe to scale the longitudinal coordinate of all particles in a pancake bunch as long as it stays sufficiently flat. Symbolically: If ΎΔψΎΔχ ΎΔψΎΔφ ΎΔυ ΎΓυ = ΎΔη ΎΔχ ΎΔφ ΎΔυ ΎΑ╝ ΎΑ╝ *z* *S* *z* *stdz* *S* *stdy* *stdx* *S* *S* *stdy* *stdz* *S* *stdx* *stdz* large large large ) , min( / / where *S*largeέΚΙ100

Clearly, this scaling can only be used when the features of interest in the bunch are έΑαpancakeέΑβ. If a έΑαhotspotέΑβ near a cathode has a radius of one-tenth of the radius of the bunch, the *S*large parameter needs to be in the order of 1000 to allow scaling.

Scaling is also possible for very low aspect ratio bunches (A<0.01). These έΑαcigarέΑβ-shaped bunches have equal transverse fields as long as the charge density remains constant. The longitudinal fields, except at the very edges, however scale inverse linear with the length. Therefore, the scaling recipe becomes: If ΎΔψ ΎΔψ ΎΔψ ΎΔχ ΎΔψ ΎΔψ ΎΔψ ΎΔφ ΎΔυ ΎΓυ ΎΓυ ΎΓυ ΎΓυ = ΎΔη ΎΔχ ΎΔφ ΎΔυ ΎΑ╛ ΎΑ╛ *z* *z* *y* *y* *small* *small* *small* *E* *S* *E* *E* *S* *E* *E* *S* *E* *z* *S* *z* *stdz* *S* *stdy* *stdx* *S* *S* *stdy* *stdz* *S* *stdx* *stdz* ) , max( / / where *S*smallέΚΙ0.01

The parameters *S*small and *S*large can be set with the `"BeamScale"` option.

##### 4.8.1.11 Transform to rest frame

To obtain the actual electromagnetic 3D space-charge fields, the electric field **E**έΑβi is transformed back to the laboratory frame. This is accomplished with the following Lorentz transformation: ( ) *c* ' ' **E** **╬▓** **B** **╬▓** **E'** **╬▓** **E** **E** ΎΓ┤ = ΎΔ║ΎΔ╗ ΎΔ╣ ΎΔςΎΔτ ΎΔσ ΎΔΩ + έΙΤ = ΎΒπ ΎΒπ ΎΒπ ΎΒπ

### 4.8.2 spacecharge3Dtree

```
spacecharge3Dtree(theta) ;
```
3D space-charge routine based on the Barnes-Hut hierarchical tree algorithm [19,20].

```
theta
```
Overall accuracy parameter. The typical range is from 0.3 (publication quality) to 1.0 (quick and dirty).

The main use of `spacecharge3Dtree` is to calculate stochastic/granularity effects such as disorder-induced heating and Boersh effect efficiently: `spacecharge3Dtree` covers all Coulomb interactions from first principles, and therefore includes both space charge and stochastic effects.

The fields of relativistic bunches are calculated in a co-moving frame, fully analogous to the `spcecharge3Dmesh` element. This element is however substantially slower compared to the PIC method employed in `spacecharge3Dmesh`. Consequently, it is wise to use this element only when granularity effects are important.

A Barnes-Hut algorithm is used to efficiently compute the fields of many interacting particles. This is an ΏζΤς(ΏζΣΒlog ΏζΣΒ)-scheme based on hierarchical grouping of distant particles. The interaction between near neighbours is calculated individually, but distant charges are grouped together into a single-charge or multipole expression, leading to substantial savings in the number of interactions necessary to calculate the fields compared to the point-to-point method employed in `spacecharge3D`. Only in the case of excessive energy spread, when there is no co-moving frame with all velocities far below the speed of light, the fully relativistic `spacecharge3D` element should be considdered.

To avoid field-discontinuities that slow down the integration of the equations of motion, each particle is represented as a Plummer sphere with smoothing length `R`. The current implementation requires this radius

Spacecharge to be identical for all particles. It can be set with the `setrmacrodist` keyword as described in section 4.2.1.12:

```
setrmacrodist(set,"u",R,0) ;
```
where `set` is the particle set, for example `"beam"`**.**

If each particle in the simulation represents one elementary particle, the smoothing length `R` must be chosen much smaller than the typical distance between the particles. In the case where each particle represents a large number of elementary particles, `R` is a tradeoff between unphysical disorder-induced heating and underestimation of space-charge forces. The έΑαcorrectέΑβ value for this case is in the order of the typical distance between the macro-particles. However, in that case we strongly recommend benchmarking against the PIC model of `spacecharge3Dmesh`.

The charge density, electrostatic field and potential of the particles are respectively given by: ( ) ( ) / / ) ( ) ( ) ( *R* *r* *q* *r* *V* *R* *r* *q* *r* *R* *r* *R* *q* *r* *r* + = + = + = ΎΒ░ΎΒξ ΎΒ░ΎΒξ ΎΒ░ ΎΒ▓ **r** **E**

The integrated charge density equals the total charge q. The limiting cases for *r*έΚτ*R* are the well-known equations for point charges: *r* *q* *r* *V* *r* *q* *r* *r* ) ( ) ( ΎΒ░ΎΒξ ΎΒ░ΎΒξ = = **r** **E**

The algorithm calculates near-neighbour interactions individually, and all other particles are grouped in increasingly larger clusters as function of distance. The dimensionless parameter `theta` sets the accuracy of the calculations by indirectly defining the number of particles that are grouped together. It is defined as the threshold for the ratio between the size of a distant cluster and its distance. For a detailed explanation of `theta`, see [21]. A smaller value for `theta` results in a higher accuracy at the expense of CPU time. Typical values are in the range 0.3 to 2.0, with a recommended range between 0.5 and 1.0. In the extreme case `theta`=0, the algorithm does not use any grouping and calculates all *N*2 interactions individually.

Quadrupole moments of the charge distribution are taken into account in the calculation as it increases the accuracy at fairly modest computational costs. If the particle distribution contains both negative and positive charge also the dipole moment is taken into account.

##### 4.8.2.1 Lorentz transformations for relativistic bunches

All particle interactions are calculated in the rest frame of the bunch, fully analogous to the `spacecharge3Dmesh` method. The rest frame is defined as the frame with zero total momentum. It has a velocity ΎΒλo and accompanying Lorentz factor ΎΒπo of respectively: ΎΒλ ΎΒπ ΎΒπ ΎΒπ ΎΒπ ΎΒπ έΙΤ = = = ΎΔξ ΎΔξ *n* *n* **╬▓** **╬▓** **╬▓**

The particle coordinates **r**i are different in the rest frame, denoted with a prime. They are a factor ΎΒπ0 expanded in the direction of the velocity of the frame: // // ' ' ' **╬▓** **╬▓** **r** **r** **r** **r** **r** **r** **r** ΎΒπ ΎΒπ ΎΒπ ΎΒπ + ΎΔΩ + = ΎΔη ΎΔχ ΎΔφ ΎΔυ = = έΛξ έΛξ

Ideally, all velocities in the rest frame are well below the speed of light. A warning is printed if the Lorentz factor of a particle *as measured in the rest frame* exceeds the value of 2. The calculated electric field **E**έΑβi is Lorentz transformed back to the laboratory frame to get the required **E** and **B** fields for the tracking:

( ) *c* ' ' **E** **╬▓** **B** **╬▓** **E'** **╬▓** **E** **E** ΎΓ┤ = ΎΔ║ΎΔ╗ ΎΔ╣ ΎΔςΎΔτ ΎΔσ ΎΔΩ + έΙΤ = ΎΒπ ΎΒπ ΎΒπ ΎΒπ

##### 4.8.2.2 Image charges The `spacecharge3Dtree` model cannot be used

directly to calculate the effect of image charges because the fields are singular at the cathode plane. Nevertheless, stochastic Coulomb interactions can be simulated while also taking into account the bulk effect of image charges. The recipe is combining three different spacecharge lines in the GPT inputfile as follows:

```
spacecharge3Dtree(theta) ;
spacecharge3Dmesh("Cathode") ;
spacecharge3Dmesh("Fieldfactor",-1) ;

```
This works because image charges are, by definition, the fields of the bunch including the (cathode) boundary condition, minus the fields of the bunch in free space. This can be simulated with two different `spacecharge3Dmesh` lines on top of the tree-based stochastic space charge model.

### 4.8.3 Spacecharge3D

```
spacecharge3D([zmin,zmax]) ;
```
Instructs GPT to take 3D space-charge effects into account using a point-to-point method.

```
zmin
```
*z*-position [m] from where to calculate the space-charge fields. If not specified, έΑΥΎΓξ is assumed.

```
zmax
```
*z*-position [m] unto where to calculate the space-charge forces. If not specified, ΎΓξ is assumed.

The fields generated by the `spacecharge3D` routine are calculated directly from relativistic particle-particle interaction. For each particle-particle contribution both particles have to be within the range `zmin` < z < `zmax`. Retardation and radiation effects are not taken into account. The advantage of this method is that no approximations are made; the disadvantage is the price in terms of CPU time. Particle-particle interactions are *N*2 processes, where *N* is the number of traced macro-particles.

To calculate the fields generated by particle *j* at the position of particle *i*, first both particle coordinates are transformed to the rest frame of particle *j*. Due to Lorentz contraction, the distance between the two particles thereby changes: ( )* **j* *j* *ji* *j* *j* *ji* *ji* *j* *ji*

 ΎΔΩ + + = έΙΤ = **r** **r** **r** **r** **r** **r** ' ΎΒπ ΎΒπ where **r***ji* is the distance measured in the lab frame and **r**'*ji* is the distance in the rest frame.

Within the rest frame of particle *j*, only an electric field is present. This coulomb field is given by ( ) / ' ' ' *R* *Q* *ji* *ji* *j* + = έΗΤ **r** **r** **E** ΎΒ░ΎΒξ where *R* is the Plummer sphere radius. This extra term in the denominator is to prevent rare divisions by zero, and it slightly increases tracking speed. It can be set with the keyword `setrmacrodist` described in section 4.2.1.12. To prevent an unrealistic drop in field amplitude, the radius *R* should be set smaller than the typical distance between two particles.

Transforming this electric field back to the lab frame and summing over all particles yields the electromagnetic fields at the position of particle *i*:

Spacecharge

( ) ΎΔξ ΎΔξ ΎΓ╣ έΗΤ ΎΓ╣ έΗΤ έΗΤ ΎΓ┤ = ΎΔ║ ΎΔ║ ΎΔ╗ ΎΔ╣ ΎΔς ΎΔς ΎΔτ ΎΔσ ΎΔΩ + έΙΤ = *j* *j* *j* *j* *j* *j* *j* *j* *j* *j* *j* *j* *c* ' ' **E** **╬▓** **B** **╬▓** **E'** **╬▓** **E** **E** ΎΒπ ΎΒπ ΎΒπ ΎΒπ

### 4.8.4 Spacecharge3Dclassic

```
spacecharge3Dclassic([zmin,zmax]) ;
```
Instructs GPT to take 3D non-relativistic space-charge effects into account using a point-to-point method.

```
zmin
```
*z*-position [m] from where to calculate the space-charge fields. If not specified, έΑΥΎΓξ is assumed.

```
zmax
```
*z*-position [m] unto where to calculate the space-charge forces. If not specified, ΎΓξ is assumed.

The fields generated by the `spacecharge3Dclassic` routine are calculated directly from non-relativistic particle-particle interaction. For each particle-particle contribution both particles have to be within the range `zmin` < z < `zmax`. Retardation, relativistic and radiation effects are not taken into account.

The coulomb field generated by particle *j* at the position of particle *i* is given by ( ) / *R* *Q* *ji* *ji* *j* *j* *ji* + = έΙΤ = έΗΤ **r** **r** **E** **r** **r** **r** ΎΒ░ΎΒξ where *R* is the Plummer sphere radius. This extra term in the denominator is to prevent rare divisions by zero, and it slightly increases tracking speed. It can be set with the keyword `setrmacrodist` described in section 4.2.1.12. To prevent an unrealistic drop in field amplitude, the radius *R* should be set smaller than the typical distance between two particles.

### 4.8.5 SetTotalCharge

```
settotalcharge(set,Q) ;
```
Sets the total charge of all particles in a set.

```
set
```
Particle set.` `

```
Q
```
Total charge [C] of the set.

This element can be used to specify the total charge of a set, analogue to the `Q` parameter of the `setparticles` function. It can only be used after all particles are added to the specified `set`.

### 4.8.6 Spacecharge2Dcircle

```
spacecharge2Dcircle([zmin,zmax]) ;
```
Calculates 2D space-charge fields using charged circles.

```
zmin
```
*z*-position [m] from where to calculate the space-charge forces. If not specified, έΑΥΎΓξ is assumed.

```
zmax
```
*z*-position [m] upto where to calculate the space-charge forces. If not specified, ΎΓξ is assumed.

The `spacecharge2Dcircle` element can be used to calculate the space-charge effect of cylinder- symmetric beams by representing every particle as a homogeneously charged circle. Because every particle represents a complete circle, the amount of particles needed to obtain correct statistics is much less when compared to the point-to-point calculations. The influence of the transverse velocity on the space-charge field is neglected.

For the calculation of the total fields working on particle *i* due to the space charge, first the parameters of the circle representing particle *j* are obtained. The radius *R*j, charge density ΎΒυj and center position **C**j are defined by: ) ,0,0 ( *j* *j* *j* *j* *j* *j* *j* *j* *z* *R* *Q* *y* *R* = = + = **C** ΎΒ░ ΎΒυ

The velocity of the circle is the longitudinal velocity of particle *j*. Therefore, the Lorentz factor ΎΒπj of the circle must be: , *j* *z* *j* ΎΒλ ΎΒπ έΙΤ =

In the rest frame of the circle, there is only an electrostatic field2F4. This field is derived from the electrostatic potential (in polar coordinates): ( ) ) sin( ) sin( ) sin( ) cos( ) sin( , ' ΎΒ▒ ΎΒ▒ ΎΒ▒ ΎΒξ ΎΒ░ ΎΒο ΎΒο ΎΒ▒ ΎΒ░ΎΒξ ΎΒυ ΎΒ▒ ΎΒ░ *Rr* *r* *R* *Rr* *r* *a* *Rr* *K* *Q* *d* *Rr* *r* *R* *R* *r* *V* *j* *j* *j* + + ΎΔ╖ΎΔ╖ ΎΔ╕ ΎΔ╢ ΎΔπΎΔπ ΎΔρ ΎΔο + + = έΙΤ + = ΎΔ▓

Using the definition3F5: ΎΔ▓ έΙΤ = ) sin( ) K( ΎΒ░ ΎΒ▒ ΎΒ▒ *d* *k* *k*

The resulting electric field in the rest frame is calculated from ' ' *V* έΙΤΎΔΣ = **E** . Calculating the gradient and converting from polar to cylindrical coordinates yields 4F6: ( ) ( ) ( ) *Rr* *d* *d* *QzE* *E* *E* *d* *z* *r* *R* *K* *Rr* *d* *r* *Q* *E* *z* *r* ' ' + = ΎΔ╖ΎΔ╖ ΎΔ╕ ΎΔ╢ ΎΔπΎΔπ ΎΔρ ΎΔο + έΙΤ έΙΤ + = ΎΒξ ΎΒ░ ΎΒκ ΎΒκ ΎΒκ ΎΒξ ΎΒ░ where ΎΔ▓ ΎΒ░ ΎΒ▒ ΎΒ▒ έΙΤ = ) sin( ) E( *d* *k* *k* , ) ( *z* *r* *R* *d* + έΙΤ = and ) ( *Rr* *d* *Rr* + = ΎΒκ . Due to Lorentz contraction in the laboratory frame, ) ( *j* *j* *z* *z* *z* έΙΤ = ΎΒπ . No relativistic effects occur in the transverse direction because the circle is assumed to have a longitudinal velocity component only.

Transforming this field back to the lab frame and adding the contributions of all particles *j* yields: ' ' ' ' ' , , , , , , , = = + = = έΙΤ = = ΎΔξ ΎΔξ ΎΔξ ΎΔξ ΎΔξ ΎΓ╣ ΎΓ╣ ΎΓ╣ ΎΓ╣ ΎΓ╣ *z* *j* *j* *z* *z* *j* *j* *j* *z* *j* *y* *j* *j* *y* *j* *y* *j* *j* *y* *j* *z* *j* *j* *j* *j* *B* *E* *E* *c* *E* *B* *E* *E* *c* *E* *B* *E* *E* ΎΒλ ΎΒπ ΎΒπ ΎΒλ ΎΒπ ΎΒπ

Currently, it is not allowed to start particles at *x*=*y*=0 while using the `spacecharge2Dcircle` element. Because this element assumes cylindrical symmetry anyway, it is best to fill only the positive x-axis as shown in the following example.

Actually, a ΎΒλΎΒς,j term could be interpreted as a rotation of the circle, and a d*R*/d*t* term as expansion and contraction. Both terms result in a magnetic field in the rest frame of the circle, but their contributions are neglected here. Please note that the argument *k* of the elliptic functions is sometimes written as *k*2 in the literature. 6 Actually, we use the Carlson elliptic functions: ) 1( R ) K( F *k* *k* έΙΤ = and ) 1( R ) 1( R ) E( D F *k* *k* *k* *k* έΙΤ έΙΤ έΙΤ = to avoid the singularity at *r*=0. Rj r z Circlecharge *j* Sample particle *i*

Spacecharge

Example: Start a 100 pC beam with a radius of 1 mm, optimally distributed for spacecharge2Dcircle. The optional `setphidist` can be specified after `setxdist` to fill the entire xy-plane.

```
nps  = 1000 ;
# Start 1000 particles
Qtot = -100e-12 ;
# Total charge 100 pC
R    = 1e-3 ;
# Beam radius of 1 mm
setparticles( "beam", nps, me, qe, Qtot ) ;
setxdist("beam","u",R/2,R) ;
setphidist"beam","u",0,2*pi) ;
setcharge2Dcircle("beam",Qtot) ;
spacecharge2Dcircle() ;

### 4.8.7 Setcharge2Dcircle

```
```
setcharge2Dcircle(set,Q)  ;
```
Sets the total charge of a particle set for the rz space-charge models.

```
set
```
Particle set.` `

```
Q
```
Total charge of the particle set [C].

The number of elementary particles represented by each macro-particle, *n*i, is calculated. In contrast to `setparticles` and `settotalcharge`, the *n*iέΑβs are not constant but a linear function of the distance of the particle to the z-axis. The total charge of all the particles in the specified `set` sums to `Q`.

When a point-to-point space-charge model is used, the optimal initial particle distribution is uniform in the xy-cross section for a uniform beam. This results in more particles at a larger radius, each representing the same number of elementary particles. However, when an rz space-charge model like `spacecharge2Dcircle` is used, it is better to distribute the particles equidistantly in *r*. This implies that particles further off-axis should carry more charge, linear with this distance. Thus each particle should represent *n* elementary particles as specified by: ΎΔξ + + = *y* *q* *y* *n*

```
Q

```
where *q**i* is the elementary charge of particle *i*. For a uniform distribution in *x* of identical particles, the equation reduces to: *q* *R* *N* *y* *n*

```
Q
```
+ =

### 4.8.8 Spacecharge2Dline

```
spacecharge2Dline([zmin,zmax]) ;
```
Calculates 2D space-charge fields using infinitely long line charges [22].

```
zmin
```
*z*-position [m] from where to calculate the space-charge forces. If not specified, έΑΥΎΓξ is assumed.

```
zmax
```
*z*-position [m] unto where to calculate the space-charge forces. If not specified, ΎΓξ is assumed.

The `spacecharge2Dline` element can be used to provide a quick estimate for space-charge forces in continuous beams or very long bunches. Every particle is represented as a moving line charge, directed in the particleέΑβs velocity. Because every particle represents a complete line, the amount of particles needed to obtain correct statistics is much less when compared to the point-to-point calculations in `spacecharge3D`.

To calculate the fields at the position of particle *i*, generated by the moving line charge representing particle *j*, first the distance **d** between the point *i* and the line *j* is calculated by: ΎΒδ ΎΒζ *j* *j* *j* *j* *ji* **r** **r** **r** **r** **d** ╦Η ╦Η ) ( ) ( ΎΔΩ ΎΔΩ έΙΤ έΙΤ έΙΤ =

The total charge (`Qtot`) parameter of `setparticles` is interpreted as the beam current [A] when `spacecharge2Dline` is used. Therefore, each particle *j* represents a current ij [A] and charge density ΎΒυj [C/m] given respectively by:

```
N
Qtot
```
= *j**i* , *j* *j* *j* = ΎΒυ

The total electromagnetic field, at the position of particle *i*, is the sum of the contributions of the individual line charges *j*. The magnetic contribution is due to the current ij, the electrical contribution due to the charge density ΎΒυj. ΎΔξ ΎΔξ ΎΓ╣ ΎΓ╣ ΎΓ┤ ΎΔΩ = έΙΤ ΎΔΩ = *j* *ji* *ji* *j* *j* *j* *ji* *ji* *j* *j* *d* *d* ) ( **d** **B** **d** **E** ΎΒ░ ΎΒφ ΎΒξ ΎΒ░

These equations are relativistically correct, even though no Lorentz transformation is applied. The transverse distribution is not restricted in any way.

When `setrmacrodist` is used, the line charges have a radius *R*. Within this radius, the equations reduce to: ΎΔξ ΎΔξ ΎΓ╣ ΎΓ╣ ΎΓ┤ ΎΔΩ = έΙΤ ΎΔΩ = *j* *ji* *j* *j* *j* *ji* *j* *j* *R* *R* ) ( **d** **B** **d** **E** ΎΒ░ ΎΒφ ΎΒξ ΎΒ░

Because every particle represents a line, the simulation must be started with a thin disk of particles. When the longitudinal dimensions of the disk become too large due to energy spread, the accuracy of the model diminishes rapidly. **r**j-**r**i **d** Linecharge *j* Sample particle *i* έΑλ έΑλ

Scattering
