## 4.9 Scattering

Despite the name of this section, it contains a description of both boundary and scatter elements. In combination, they can be used to generate particles scattered off a surface, as described in section 1.11. Arbitrary diffraction patters can be simulated using the scatterbitmap element.

4.9.1 ForwardScatter
4.9.2 CopperScatter
4.9.3 ScatterBitmap
4.9.4 ScatterCone
4.9.5 ScatterIris
4.9.6 ScatterPipe
4.9.7 ScatterPlate
4.9.8 ScatterSphere
4.9.9 ScatterTorus

An aspect ratio of 1 is recommended when inspecting scattered trajectories. Without such an aspect-ratio all angles will be deformed, making interpretation much harder.

### 4.9.1 ForwardScatter

```
forwardscatter(ECS,name,P,[nmin]) ;
```
Scatter a particle in the forward direction with probability P.

```
ECS
```
Element Coordinate System.

```
name
```
Name of the surface.

```
P
```
Scatter probability.

```
nmin
```
Minimum nmacro.

A specularly reflected macro-particle is generated with the same energy as the incident particle in the forward direction. The new number of elementary particles this macro-particle represent is `P*nmacro`. When this `P*nmacro<nmin`, the new particle is not generated. Scatter output is written in the outputfile relative to the specified `ECS`.

One of the applications of the boundary elements is to remove particles using the `forwardscatter` element with a scattering probability of 0. This is demonstrated in the following example:

```
forwardscatter("wcs","I","remove", 0) ;
scatteriris("wcs","z", 1, 0.5,2 ) scatter="remove" ;

### 4.9.2 CopperScatter

```
```
copperscatter(ECS,name,nmin,nmax) ;
```
Scatter a particle from a copper surface. The copperscatter element uses extrapolated data not yet experimentally confirmed.

```
ECS
```
Element Coordinate System.

```
name
```
Name of the surface.

```
nmin
```
Minimum nmacro, typically 1% of the initial nmacro.

```
nmax
```
Maximum nmacro, typically ignored by setting to 200% of the initial nmacro.

The probability for forward scattering is 1/3, the chance for backward is 2/3. The overall reflection chance is the product of the angle of incidence dependence and the dependence on the kinetic energy of the incident particle, as shown in Figure 4-21 and Figure 4-22. This overall reflection chance determines the `nmacro` of the reflected particle as calculated in `forwardscatter`. When the product of the scattering probabilities times the `nmacro` of the incident particle is below `nmin`, no new particle is generated. The total kinetic energy of the reflected particle varies uniformly between 45% and 95% of the kinetic energy of the incident particle.

Figure 4-21: Reflection chance as function of angle of incidence. Zero angle corresponds to normal incidence.

Figure 4-22: Reflection chance as function of incoming kinetic energy. The simple function for the reflection chance as function of incoming kinetic energy comes form an extrapolaton of the data fom [23]. Custom scater routines can be written, as is explained in the Programmer’s Reference.

### 4.9.3 ScatterBitmap

```
scatterbitmap(ECS,name,filename,xres,yres) ;
```
Scatter a particle with an arbitrary distribution as specified in a bitmap.

```
ECS
```
Element Coordinate System.

```
name
```
Name of the surface.

```
filename
```
Filename of a grayscale bitmap file (.bmp) containing the desired momentum distribution.

```
xres
```
Normalized x-momentum change per pixel.

```
yres
```
Normalized y-momentum change per pixel.

When a particle passed through a ‘scatterbitmap’ surface, the normalized horizontal and vertical momenta are changed according to the probability function given in `filename`. This can be used, for example, to model a diffraction process where the bitmap contains white-values representing the angular probability function for the diffraction process under investigation. In the example below, we use a simple bitmap contaning the text ‘test’ in white.

Example: GPT inputfile diffracting a 1x1 mm square input beam off a ‘test’ bitmap.

Scattering

```
# setparticles("beam",10000,me,qe,0) ;

setxdist("beam","u",0,1e-3) ;
setydist("beam","u",0,1e-3) ; setGdist("beam","u",1.2,0) ;

scatterbitmap("wcs","I","diffract","test.bmp",0.001,0.001) ;
scatterplate("wcs","z",0.01,1,1) scatter="diffract" ;
tout(0,1e-9,0.01e-9) ;

### 4.9.4 ScatterCone

```
```
scattercone(ECS,z1,R1,z2,R2) scatter="sm" ;
```
Cone-shaped scattering surface.

```
ECS
```
Element Coordinate System.

```
z1
```
*z*-position [m] of radius `R1`.

```
R1
```
Radius [m] of cone at *z*=`z1` position.

```
z2
```
*z*-position [m] of radius `R2`.

```
R2
```
Radius [m] of cone at *z*=`z2` position.

```
sm
```
Scatter model to be used.

New particles are generated when an incident particle passes through the infinitely thin cone surface. The particles are scattered according to the scattering model.

The equation for the cone boundary is given by: ) ( =       − − − + − +

```
z1
z1
z2
R1
R2
R1
```
*z* *y*

Example: GPT inputfile with cone surface, 50% forward scattering probability. Plot zx.

```
# Demonstration inputfile for cone scattering element
setstartline("beam",50, -2.5,0,0, 2.5,0,0, 0,0,1) ; forwardscatter("wcs","I","scat", 0.5) ;
scattercone("wcs","I", 1,0.5, 2.0,1.5 ) scatter="scat" ; tout(0, 6/c, 0.06/c) ;

```
-3 -2 -1 GPT x [mm] -1 y [mm] -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 GPT x [mm] -2 y [mm]

### 4.9.5 ScatterIris

```
scatteriris(ECS,Rin,Rout) scatter="sm" ;
```
Iris- or disk-shaped scattering surface.

```
ECS
```
Element coordinate system.

```
Rin
```
Inner radius [m] of disk.

```
Rout
```
Outer radius [m] of disk.

```
sm
```
Scatter model to be used.

New particles are generated when an incident particle passes through the infinitely thin plate surface around the opening. The particles are scattered according to the scattering model. The normal of the disk is the z- axis.

The description of the plate boundary is given by: = *z* if r>Rin and r<Rout.

Example: GPT inputfile with iris surface, particles are removed. Plot zx.

```
# Demonstration inputfile for iris scattering element
setstartline("beam",50, -2.5,0,0, 2.5,0,0, 0,0,1) ; forwardscatter("wcs","I","remove", 0) ;
scatteriris("wcs","z", 1, 0.5,2 ) scatter="remove" ; tout(0, 4/c, 0.04/c) ;

### 4.9.6 ScatterPipe

```
```
scatterpipe(ECS,z1,z2,R) scatter="sm" ;
```
Pipe-shaped scattering surface.

```
ECS
```
Element Coordinate System.

```
z1
```
*z*-position [m] where the pipe begins.

```
z2
```
*z*-position [m] where the pipe ends.

```
R
```
Radius [m] of pipe.

```
sm
```
Scatter model to be used.

New particles are generated when an incident particle passes through the infinitely thin pipe surface. The particles are scattered according to the scattering model.

Scattering

The description of the cone boundary is given by: = − +

```
R
```
*y*

Example: GPT inputfile with pipe surface, 50% scattering probability. Plot xy.

```
# Demonstration inputfile for pipe scattering element
setstartline("beam",50, -2,2,0, 2,2,0, 0,-1,0) ; forwardscatter("wcs","I","scat", 0.5) ;
scatterpipe("wcs","I", -1,1, 1 ) scatter="scat" ; tout(0, 4/c, 0.04/c) ;

### 4.9.7 ScatterPlate

```
```
scatterplate(ECS,a,b) scatter="sm" ;
```
Plate-shaped scattering surface.

```
ECS
```
Element Coordinate System.

```
a
```
Total plate length in x-direction.

```
b
```
Total plate length in y-direction.

```
sm
```
Scatter model to be used.

New particles are generated when an incident particle passes through the infinitely thin plate surface. The particles are scattered according to the scattering model. The normal of the plate is the z-axis.

The description of the plate boundary is given by: = *z*

Example: GPT inputfile with plate surface, particles are removed. Plot xy.

```
# Demonstration inputfile for plate scattering element

setparticles("beam",1000,me,qe,0.0) ;
setxdist("beam","u",0,2) ;
setydist("beam","u",0,2) ;
setGdist("beam","u",10,1) ; forwardscatter("wcs","I","remove", 0.0) ;
scatterplate("wcs","z",1, 1,1 ) scatter="remove" ;
tout(2/c) ;

### 4.9.8 ScatterSphere

```
```
scattersphere(ECS,R,[a1,a2]) scatter="sm" ;
```
Sphere-shaped scattering surface.

```
ECS
```
Element Coordinate System.

```
R
```
Radius of sphere.

```
a1
```
Start angle [rad] measured ccw from the **z**-direction in the zR-plane.

```
a2
```
End angle [rad] measured ccw from the **z**-direction in the zR-plane.

```
sm
```
Scatter model to be used.

New particles are generated when an incident particle passes through the infinitely thin sphere surface. The particles are scattered according to the scattering model. The symmetry axis of the sphere is the z-axis.

The description of the sphere boundary is given by: = − + +

```
R
```
*z* *y*

Example: GPT inputfile with sphere surface, 50% scattering probability. Plot zx.

```
# Demonstration inputfile for an open sphere scattering element
setstartline("beam",50, 2,0,-2, 2,0,2, -1,0,0) ; forwardscatter("wcs","I","scat", 0.5) ;
scattersphere("wcs","I", 1, pi/2,pi ) scatter="scat" ; tout(0, 4/c, 0.04/c) ;

### 4.9.9 ScatterTorus

```
```
scattertorus(ECS,Rout,Rin,[a1,a2]) scatter="sm" ;
```
Torus-shaped scattering surface.

```
ECS
```
Element Coordinate System.

```
Rout
```
Outer radius [m] of torus.

```
Rin
```
Inner radius [m] of torus.

```
a1
```
Start angle [rad] measured ccw from the **z**-direction in the zr-plane.

```
a2
```
End angle [rad] measured ccw from the **z**-direction in the zr-plane.

```
sm
```
Scatter model to be used.

New particles are generated when an incident particle passes through the infinitely thin torus surface. The particles are scattered according to the scattering model.

The description of the torus boundary is given by: ) ( ) ( = − + + + + − + − *b* *z* *y* *b* *z* *y* *a* *a* where *a* is the outer radius and *b* is the inner radius of the torus.

Scattering

Example: GPT inputfile with torus surface, 50% scattering probability. Plot zx.

```
# Demonstration inputfile for torus scattering element
setstartline("beam",50, 3,0,-2, 3,0,2, -1,0,0) ; forwardscatter("wcs","I","scat", 0.5) ;
scattertorus("wcs","I", 1.1,1.0, 0,pi/2 ) scatter="scat" ; tout(0, 4/c, 0.04/c) ;

```
