# Input and Output
## Conversion to *SixTrack*

*SixTrack* is a separate beam optics code that is often used for long term tracking of particles, *e.g.* for dynamic aperture studies, because of its speed and controllability.

However the input files are notoriously difficult to produce by hand. This command may be used to generate *SixTrack* input files from a sequence loaded in `MAD-X`.

> 

The parameters are defined as:

(optional flag) This puts a cavity element (*SixTrack* identifier 12) with Volt, Harmonic Number and Lag attributes at each location in the machine. Since for large hadron machines the cavities are typically all located at one particular spot in the machine and since many cavities slow down the tracking simulations considerably all cavities are lumped into one and located at the first appearance of a cavity. This default is enforced by omitting this flag.

(optional flag, default = FALSE) If TRUE, this module does not process zero value multipoles. Moreover, multipoles are prepared by `SIXTRACK` (output file fc.3) to be treated up to the order as specified with `MAX_MULT_ORD`.

(optional parameter, default = 11) Process up to this order for `MULT_AUTO_OFF = TRUE`.

(optional flag) OBSOLETE. This splits all the elements in two. This is for backward compatibilty only. The user should now use the [`MAKETHIN`](#chap:makethin) command instead.

(optional flag) flag to convert the apertures from `MAD-X` to *SixTrack* so that *SixTrack* can track with apertures defined. The aperture data is found in file `fc.3.aper`.

(optional, default value is 1 m). This sets the reference radius for the magnets. This argument is optional but should normally be set.

(optional flag, default false) flag to convert all markers through the conversion. If false, only markers with names beginning with "ip" or "mt\_" are kept.

(optional flag, default false) flag to increase the possible length of names (from 17 to 48) and increase the number of digits in the output in the conversion.

(optional, default value=0) Some new formats are only supported in recent versions of SixTrack. In order to output in these formats a version number higher or equal to the number when it was implemented needs to be set. If the needed SixTrack version is 5.02.03 then the version should be set to 50203.

**Important Notes:**

- The files contain all information concerning optics, field errors and misalignments. Hence these should all be set and a

  > <div class="tabbing">
  >
  > TWISS, SAVE;
  >
  > </div>

  command should always be issued before calling the `SIXTRACK` command.

- The [BV flag](#sec:bvflag) is presently ignored by `SIXTRACK`.

- *SixTrack* and the `MAD-X` command `SIXTRACK` are presently set up for names of a maximum of 16 characters!!!!! Therefore, it is mandatory to respect this limit for `MAD-X` names.

The `SIXTRACK` command always produces at least one output file:

- fc.2 - the basic structure of the lattice.

It may also produce any or all of the following files, depending on the sequence and command attributes:

- fc.3 - multipole mask(s).

- fc.3.aux - various beam parameters.

- fc.3.aper - aperture element data (units are `mm` and `degrees`).

- fc.8 - misalignments and tilts.

- fc.16 - field errors and/or combined multipole kicks.

- fc.34 - various optics parameters at various locations\
  This file is not needed by *SixTrack* but may be used as input to the program *SODD*.)

For a full description of these files see the *SixTrack* website, the *SixTrack* user manual; and for information on running *S*ixTrack see the *SixTrack* run environment description.
