# Input and Output
## Plotting data

Values contained in `MAD-X` tables can be plotted directly in `MAD-X` in the form column versus column, with up to four differently scaled vertical axes and up to 10 different variables in total for all vertical axes.

If the horizontal axis is the position "s" of the elements in a sequence, a symbolic representation of the beamline can also be displayed at the top of the plot.

In certain conditions true interpolation of optical functions and parameters inside the element is available through internal slicing of the element and a call to the [`TWISS`](#chap:twiss) module for each slice.

The basic plot attributes, such as line thickness, annotation size, and PostScript format and interpolation can be set with the [`SETPLOT`](#sec:setplot) command and reset with the [`RESPLOT`](#sec:resplot) command.

Note also that for various reasons a sequence must be defined before the `PLOT` command can be invoked.

### PLOT

> 

where the parameters have the following meaning:

name of the horizontal variable

lower and upper edge for horizontal axis. Both values must be provided.

one or several variables from the table to be plotted against a single vertical axis. If more than 10 variables are specified, the plot is not produced.

one or several variables from the table to be plotted against vertical axis number *i*. There is a maximum of 4 vertical axes.\
If the number of variables given for a single vaxis*i* would push the total number of variables beyond the maximum of 10, the variables given for this vaxis*i*, as well as those for subsequent vaxes, are ignored but the plot is produced for the variables accumulated so far.\
*Important: VAXIS and VAXIS1..4 are exclusive in their application! if VAXIS is given, VAXIS1..4 will be simply ignored.*

lower and upper edge(s) for vertical axis or axes, up to four numbers separated by commas.\
Note that both vmin and vmax must be given for an axis to be effective.

plot title string; if absent, the last overall title is used; if no such overall title as well, the sequence name is used.

0 (default) or 1 - with bars=1, all data points are connected to the horizontal axis with vertical bars.

1 (default), 2, 3, or 4: line style for connecting the successive data points, respectively solid, dashed, dotted, and dot-dashed; the special value style=100 uses the four styles in turn for successive curves in the same plot. With style=0 successive data points are not connected.

1 (default), 2, 3, 4, or 5: colour for the symbols and lines, respectively black, red, green, blue, and magenta; The special value colour=100 uses the five colours in turn for successive symbols and lines.

0 (default), 1, 2, 3, 4, or 5: The symbols to be plotted at data points, respectively none, dot ("."), plus ("+"), star ("\*"), circle ("o"), and cross ("x"). The symbol size may have to be adapted through the SETPLOT command (see below).\
Note that if symbol and style are both zero, style is forced to its default value (style=1) otherwise the plot would be invisible.

logical, default=false. The data points are normally connected by straight lines; if `INTERPOLATE` is specified, the following on-momentum Twiss parameters are interpolated with calls to the Twiss module inside each element: beta, sqrt(beta), alfa, phase advance, orbit, angle, dispersion and its first derivative, for both planes.\
For all other variables splines are used to smooth the curves.\
**Note** that setting this option is ineffective if the `INTERPOLATE` option of the [`SETPLOT`](#sec:setplot) command has been set to true; in this case all plots will be interpolated.\
**Note** also that because the `INTERPOLATE` option causes `TWISS` to be called internally with a range, any range that might have been defined in a previous [`USE`](#sec:use) command is lost. In this case the `USE` statement must be reiterated with the range, which in turn could cause assigned errors to be lost.\
**Caution** the attribute `INTERPOLATE` actually replaces expressions stored into element attributes by their value. It is plan to correct the problem, but it is not yet fixed.

To be documented (default = false)

logical, default=false. If `NOVERSION=true`, the information concerning the version of `MAD-X` and the date of the run are suppressed from the title. This option frees additional space available for the user specified title of the plot.

logical, default=false. If `s` is the horizontal variable, then a symbolic representation of the beamline is plotted above the plot, except for tables that have been read back into `MAD-X`. In case the horizontal scale is too large and the density of beamline elements is too high, this may result in hardly legible representation and a thick black block in the worst case. The `NOLINE=true` option suppresses this symbolic representation of the beamline.

logical, default=false. If true, suppresses the title line, including the information on the version and date.

logical, default=false. If true, plotting is done also at the location of marker elements. This is only useful for the plotting of non-continuous functions like the "N1" from the aperture module. Beware that the PS file might become very large if this flag is invoked.

logical, default=false. Allows the specification of a plotting range for the user defined horizontal axis.

horizontal plot [range](#sec:range) given by elements.

name of the table from which data is plotted (default: twiss).\
If the first part of the name of the table is "track", the data to be plotted are taken from the tracking file(s) generated by a previous TRACK command for each requested particle as defined by the *particle* attribute. If the required file has not been generated by a preceding TRACK command, no plot is done for that particle.\
The plot is generated through the GNUPLOT program and is available in the format specified by the SETPLOT command.\
The preceding TRACK command should contain the attribute *DUMP* and may contain the attribute *ONETABLE*. The tracking plots are appended to the file file_name.ps where file_name can be specified via the attribute *filename=file_name*. Note that the plots are appended to this file and the file is not overwritten.\
The PLOT command uses the following tracking output files depending on the name of the table.\
With the attribute *table=trackone*, the data file is assumed to have been generated with the *ONETABLE=true* attribute of the TRACK command, and the file name has the following format: *basisone* where the basis for the file name is defined by the attribute *trackfile=basis* (default=track).\
With the attribute *table=trackxxx* where xxx is any string other than "one", the data files are assumed to have been generated with the *ONETABLE=false* attribute of the TRACK command, and the file names have the following format: *basis.obs0001.p00i* where the basis for the file name is defined by the attribute *trackfile=basis* (default=track), the observation point fixed is to 1 and the particle number *i* is given by the attribute *particle=i*.

one or several numbers associated to the tracked particles for which the specified plot has to be displayed.

logical, default=false. If true all the curves generated for each tracked particle are put on one plot. Otherwise there will be one plot for each particle.

basename for the Postscript file(s). Only the first occurrence of such a name will be used. Default is "madx" or "madx_track" if the *table* attribute is track. Depending on the format (.ps or .eps, see below) the plots will either all be written into one file file_name.ps, or one per plot into file_name01.eps, file_name02.eps, etc.\
**Note:** in the case of several `PLOT` commands in a single `MAD-X` job, the first `FILE` argument determines the basename and other `FILE` arguments in subsequent `PLOT` commands are ignored.

basename of the files containing tracking data for each particle (default: track)

logical, default=false. If set true, the data to be plotted are taken from the table defined by the attribute *ptc_table* which is expected to be generated previously by the ptc package. The data belong to the column identified by one of the names set in the definition of the ptc twiss table. Interpolation is not available and the attribute *interpolate* has no effect.\
This option is recommended when plotting data obtained from [`PTC_TWISS`](#chap:ptc-twiss) since there is no mechanism for `PLOT` to physically interpolate the optical functions beyond using splines with no mechanism for constraints with derivatives. In most cases the `INTERPOLATE` option with data obtained with `PTC_TWISS` produces unphysical data representation.

name of the ptc twiss table from which data is plotted (default: ptc_twiss)

### SETPLOT

> 

where the parameters have the following meaning:

default = 1. If =1, makes one PostScript file (.ps) with all plots; if =2, makes one Encapsulated PostSscript file (.eps) per plot.

there are two defaults: 1 for screen plotting: this uses characters made from polygons; -1 for PostScript files; this is Times-Italic. There are various fonts available for positive and negative integers, best to be tried out, since they will look different on different systems anyway. GhostView will show strange vertical axis annotations, but the printed versions are normally OK.

default = 1. Allows the user to set the curve line width. Depends on the system as well, so to be tried out.

bounding box size for PostScript, default=27 cm.

bounding box size for PostScript, default=19 cm.

annotation character height scale factor, default=1.

axis label character height scale factor, default=1.

curve symbol (see above) scale factor, default=1.

axis text character height scale factor, default=1.

(default=false) The data points are normally connected by straight lines; if `INTERPOLATE` is specified, the following on-momentum Twiss parameters are interpolated with calls to the Twiss module inside each element: beta, sqrt(beta), alfa, phase advance, orbit, angle, dispersion and its first derivative, for both planes.\
For all other variables splines are used to smooth the curves.\
Note that if `INTERPOLATE=true`, all subsequent `PLOT` commands use interpolation, irrespective of the setting of their `INTERPOLATE` attribute;\
If `INTERPOLATE=false` (default), all subsequent `PLOT` commands respect the setting of their `INTERPOLATE` attribute.

### RESPLOT

> 

resets all defaults for the [`SETPLOT`](#sec:setplot) command.

### First example for plots of tracking data

The following `MAD-X` code sample defines the tracking of four particles with the generation of a single file with name *basisone* holding the tracking data for all four particles.

    // track particles
    track, file=basis, dump, onetable;
     start, x= 2e-3, px=0, y= 2e-3, py=0;
     start, x= 4e-3, px=0, y= 4e-3, py=0;
     start, x= 6e-3, px=0, y= 6e-3, py=0;
     start, x= 8e-3, px=0, y= 8e-3, py=0;
     run,turns=1024;
    endtrack;

The following sample code defines the plotting of the x-px and y-py phase space coordinates for all four particles. It takes into account the fact that all coordinates are in a single file with *table=trackone* and defines the filename where tracking data is to be found (*basisone*) with *trackfile=basis*.

    // plot trajectories
    setplot, post=1; 
    title, "FODO phase-space test";
    plot, file=plot, table=trackone, trackfile=basis, noversion, multiple, 
          haxis=x, vaxis=px, particle=1,2,3,4; 
    plot, file=plot, table=trackone, trackfile=basis, noversion, multiple, 
          haxis=y, vaxis=py, particle=1,2,3,4;

With each plot command a temporary file *gnu_plot.gp* containing GNUPLOT instructions is generated. The file generated by the first plot command reads:

    set terminal postscript color
    set pointsize 0.48
    set output 'tmpplot.ps'
    set title "FODO phase-space test"
    set xlabel 'x'
    set ylabel 'px'
    plot 'basisone' using 3:($1==1 ? $4 : NaN) title 'particle 1' with points pointtype 1 , \
         'basisone' using 3:($1==2 ? $4 : NaN) title 'particle 2' with points pointtype 2 , \
         'basisone' using 3:($1==3 ? $4 : NaN) title 'particle 3' with points pointtype 3 , \
         'basisone' using 3:($1==4 ? $4 : NaN) title 'particle 4' with points pointtype 4 

`MAD-X` then calls GNUPLOT as a subprocess to execute this file, which generates the file *tmpplot.ps*. The file *tmpplot.ps* is then **appended** to the file *p*lot.ps determined by the attribute *file=plot*. The files *gnu_plot.gp* and *tmpplot.ps* are then discarded.

The same process is repeated for the second plot command, resulting in a growing file *plot.ps*.

### Second example for plots of tracking data

The following `MAD-X` code sample defines the tracking of four particles with the generation of individual files with name *basis.obs0001.p000i* with *i=1..4* holding the tracking data for each of the four particles.

    // track particles
    track, file=basis, dump;
     start, x= 2e-3, px=0, y= 2e-3, py=0;
     start, x= 4e-3, px=0, y= 4e-3, py=0;
     start, x= 6e-3, px=0, y= 6e-3, py=0;
     start, x= 8e-3, px=0, y= 8e-3, py=0;
     run,turns=1024;
    endtrack;

The following sample code defines the plotting of the x-px and y-py phase space coordinates for all four particles with the data of all four particles on a single plot. It takes into account the fact that coordinates for all four particles are in separate files with *table=<u>t</u>rackfodo* and defines the filename where tracking data is to be found (*basis.obs0001.p000i*) with *trackfile=basis*.

    // plot trajectories
    setplot, post=1; 
    title, "FODO phase-space test";
    plot, file=plot, table=trackfodo, trackfile=basis, noversion, multiple, 
          haxis=x, vaxis=px, particle=1,2,3,4; 
    plot, file=plot, table=trackfodo, trackfile=basis, noversion, multiple, 
          haxis=y, vaxis=py, particle=1,2,3,4;  

With each plot command a temporary file gnu_plot.gp containing GNUPLOT instruction is generated. The file generated by the first plot command reads:

    set terminal postscript color
    set pointsize 0.48
    set output 'tmpplot.ps'
    set title "FODO phase-space test"
    set xlabel 'x'
    set ylabel 'px'
    plot 'basis.obs0001.p0001' using 3:4 title 'particle 1' with points pointtype 1 , \
         'basis.obs0001.p0002' using 3:4 title 'particle 2' with points pointtype 2 , \
         'basis.obs0001.p0003' using 3:4 title 'particle 3' with points pointtype 3 , \
         'basis.obs0001.p0004' using 5:4 title 'particle 4' with points pointtype 4 

`MAD-X` then calls GNUPLOT as a subprocess to execute this file, which generates the file *tmpplot.ps*. The file *tmpplot.ps* is then **appended** to the file *plot.ps* determined by the attribute *file=plot*. The files *gnu_plot.gp* and *tmpplot.ps* are then discarded.

The same process is repeated for the second plot command, resulting in a growing file *plot.ps*.

### MAD-X PLUGINS

`MAD-X` provides a plug-in mechanism for functionality extensions. Plug-in technique does not require linking at build time. The job is done at the time plug-in is loaded by the dynamic linker. In order to use any plug-in, the plugin support must be compiled in `MAD-X`. At the top of every `MAD-X` makefile there is variable PLUGIN_SUPPORT that must be set to "YES". Then, the appropriate C interface is compiled in and `MAD-X` is linked dynamically. Plug-ins must be accessible to the dynamic linker. The default location where plug-ins are searched is \$HOME/.madx/plugins. Otherwise, the directory containing the library must be either listed in

1.  the configuration file of the dynamic linker (on SLC3 it is /etc/ld.so.conf)

2.  `LD_LIBRARY_PATH` environment variable

Existing plug-ins

1.  `RPLOT`

**Example**\
**PROGRAMMERS MANUAL**\
The interface is not yet fully defined. The documentation apears at the moment it happens.

### RPLOT

`RPLOT` is a `MAD-X` plug-in that privides additional functionality using [ROOT](http://root.cern.ch). It contains several tools.

 **RVIEWER**  
*plotting tool that handles the results in paramremtric form*

What makes it different from the standard PLOT module of `MAD-X` is that it is also able to deal with the parmateric results. `RPLOT` provides graphical user interface that allows to choose which functions shall be drawn, set its ranges and adjust all the details of the plot formatting. Of course, the result is immendiately visible on the screen, in contrary to the standard plot tool that is able to work solely in the batch mode. The user can choose several formats to save his plot, including postscript, gif, pdf, root macro and many others.

`RVIEWER` is able to draw the lattice functions

1.  along the layout

2.  at given position in function of one or two knobs

It provides a convienient way to set the knob values. As the value is set, the plotted functions are immediately drawn for the new value.

In order to run `RVIEWER` simpy issue "rviewer;" command

**RTRACKSTORE**  
*enables storage of the tracking data in ROOT NTuple/Tree format*

Ntuple and its modern extension called Tree are formats designed for storing particle tracking data. It is proven to provide the fastest data writing and reading thanks to column wise I/O operations. It is commonly used for data storage by HEP experiments. Additionally, ROOT provides automatical ZIP data compression that is transparent for the user algorithms. Morover, ROOT provides wide set of very comfortable tools for advanced analysis and plotting of the data stored in Trees.

Addtionally, we plan to extend `RVIEWER` functionality that would provide intuitive graphical user interface to most commonly used features in particle tracking in accelerators. Thanks to that, the user is not forced to learn how to use the ROOT package.

Currently the feature is enabled only for tracking using the `PTC_TRACKLINE` command, however, it will be extended to other tracking modes.

**Installation**\
Prerequisite: ROOT must be installed before compilation and whenever the user wants to use the plug-in. See explanations on [ROOT webpage](http://root.cern.ch).\
To install `RPLOT`

1.  Unpack the archive, it will create directory rplot

           tar xvzf rplot-X.XX.tgz

2.  Change to rplot directory

           cd rplot

3.  Type

           make install

**Examples**

**SYNOPSIS**

    RVIEWER; 

**PROGRAMMERS MANUAL**\
To be continued...
