## 4.2 Tracking Accuracy Parameters

4 Important Values that Affect the Validity and
Accuracy of Simulations

Particle simulations are inherently complicated and CPU intensive. The Geant4 toolkit necessarily
provides facilities to permit users to make trade-offs between accuracy and CPU time. G4beamline
likewise considers this a user issue, and provides interfaces to Geant4 mechanisms as well as some new
capabilities. To perform simulations that yield results you can trust, you must make some choices that
affect the accuracy and validity of the results. It is often equally important to avoid becoming
overwhelmed by useless information. Features related to these are described in this section.
### 4.1 Physics List

The Geant4 toolkit contains a large number of physics processes that implement the transportation,
decays, and interactions of particles. In addition, Geant4 is extensible, and users can construct their own
physics processes. These processes are numerous and complex, and often have complex relationships
between different processes, so it is a challenge for users to become sufficiently knowledgeable to select
the necessary processes and implement them in code. As a result, the Geant4 collaboration has
constructed a number of “physics lists” that are crafted from the library of physics processes to be
suitable for a specific user domain.

G4beamline shields the user from much of this complexity, and only offers to the user the choice among
the Geant4 physics lists, plus a few additional lists constructed for special purposes. In particular, it is
not possible for users to implement a new physics process in G4beamline without building the program
yourself (that is rather complicated, but you can request a new feature to have us do it – see section 8.3).
The physics list is selected by the physics command, and the set of available lists is given in the help text
for that command (see section 8.4).

As a rule of thumb, for incident particles with kinetic energies above 12 GeV or so, the “standard”
physics list is FTFP. For incident particles with kinetic energies above about 100 MeV, the “standard”
physics list is FTFP_BERT (it is noticeably slower than FTFP below ~12 GeV). The electromagnetic
processes of these physics lists are advertised to be valid above a few hundred electron Volts; Geant4
has a set of low energy electromagnetic processes, indicated by a suffix “_EMX” in the physics list
name. The suffix “_EMV” indicates electromagnetic processes tuned for better CPU performance with
only slightly less precision.

There are a number of values in Geant4 that affect the accuracy of its tracking. The important ones are
implemented in G4beamline as parameters, and they can be set anywhere in your input.file with the
param command (the final value is what matters). These control such things as how close to a geometric
boundary a track must come before it is considered to have hit the volume, how far a track can deviate
from a straight line during a single step (due to a magnetic field), etc. They are:

Parameter Name
Default
Description
deltaChord
3 mm

See the Geant4 Physics manual and User’s Guide for a
description and discussion.
deltaIntersection
0.1 mm
deltaOneStep
0.01 mm
epsMax
0.05
epsMin
2.5E-7
maxStep
100 mm
The maximum physics step permitted to be taken. Note this is
a limit on the physics step; integrating the equations of motion
will take multiple “integration steps” within this. Can be
overridden in each element.
minStep
0.01 mm
The minimum physics step permitted to be taken.
zTolerance
2 mm
How close to a specified Z position a step must occur (the two
steps surrounding the Z position are then linearly interpolated).

These parameters specify the trade-off between tracking accuracy and CPU time. These are reasonable
values for beamlines or detectors of ordinary sizes (with scales from roughly a few millimeters to a few
tens of meters; the length of a narrow beamline can reasonably extend to a few kilometers). If you have
objects smaller than a millimeter or so, or are working on scales larger than a kilometer or so, you
should consider changing these values appropriately. If you have small objects spread over a large
volume, in general you should select parameter values appropriate for the small objects and realize that
the simulation will most likely require lots of CPU time.

Note that Geant4 tracking has two different meanings of the word ‘step’:
Physics step
Defaults to a maximum of 100 mm, and determines the maximum step for
applying physics processes. At each step it is set to the smallest value of:
o the current value of maxStep
o the distance to the next geometrical boundary
o the smallest value determined by any active physics process
Integration step
Determined automatically from the other tracking parameters (primarily
deltaChord), and determines the accuracy of the integration of the equations of
motion. In a magnetic field this is of course a helix. There can be many
integration steps within a single physics step, and usually are in a magnetic
field.
In particular, the accuracy of the tracking is usually not significantly improved for small physics step
sizes. For instance, tracking 250 MeV/c muons through 1 meter of liquid hydrogen in a 2 Tesla solenoid
(including multiple scattering and energy loss) shows no significant difference between maxStep=1 and
maxStep=1000 in position or momentum histograms2 – the execution time differs by a factor of about
50, so don’t set maxStep to a small value unless you have a specific reason to do so.

2 This comparison can only be done statistically, not on an individual track basis, because different values of maxStep
inherently use different numbers of random numbers, causing variations in stochastic processes like multiple scattering and
ionization energy loss.
