## 4.5 Track Cuts

### 4.3 Electromagnetic Field Map Tolerance

Several elements that implement electromagnetic fields internally construct a field map, because
evaluating the field during tracking is too CPU intensive. These are: coil and fieldexpr. They each have a
tolerance argument that is used to determine the required grid spacing of the map. Its value obviously
affects the accuracy of the simulation. This is of course also true for externally supplied EM field maps.
### 4.4 Secondary Creation Threshold in Physics Processes

An important trade-off between physics accuracy and CPU time in Geant4 is the production of lowenergy delta rays (e–) and other particles, which diverge at low energies. The approach is to only
generate a secondary when the range of the particle in the current material exceeds a user-specified
minimum range cut (which is converted to a kinetic-energy threshold for each material). Particles with
shorter ranges are not produced as secondaries, but are lumped into the continuous ionization energy
loss in the material. In G4beamline, this is set by the minRangeCut argument to the physics command;
its default value is 1 mm. If your simulation has objects smaller than that, or you are working at scales
much larger than that, you should consider changing its value, unless you just don’t care about these
low-energy particles.

The trackcuts command applies cuts to every track both before starting to track it, and at every step
while tracking. These can obviously affect the realism and accuracy of the simulation; they also can be
quite useful for weeding out extraneous information (e.g. the neutrinos generated by pion and muon
decay). The cuts it can apply are:

Argument Name
Default
Description
kill
(empty)
Comma-separated list of particles to kill.
keep
(empty)
Comma-separated list of particles to keep (kill all others);
ignored if empty.
killSecondaries
0
Set nonzero to kill all secondaries.
kineticEnergyCut
0 MeV
Minimum kinetic energy to track.
kineticEnergyMax
Infinite MeV Maximum kinetic energy to track.
maxTime
1000000 ns
Maximum lab time to track.

In addition, there is a processing time limit implemented as a parameter, eventTimeLimit (defaults to 30
seconds). This applies to the real time used during the processing of all tracks in the event. For
simulations in which showers are important (and are not suppressed), this may need to be increased.
Unfortunately, it is implemented as a real time limit, not a CPU time limit, so on excessively loaded
systems it may also need to be increased (not usually a problem). There is also a wallClockLimit that
will exit the simulation gracefully when the total wall clock time exceeds its value (default is infinite).
