## 4.9 Miscellaneous

• There is a bug in Geant4 tracking that makes gross errors when tracking a particle that stops and
turns around (e.g. it is traveling exactly opposite to an E field sufficient to stop it). This has been
reported as Geant4 bug #1021, and the command bug1021 implements a work-around that
resolves the issue with an accuracy of a few microns. This is a difficult problem, as Geant4
tracks in space (not time), and for a stopping particle the equations of motion become singular.
• A number of Geant4 processes have auxiliary commands that can vary their operation. See the
Geant4 documentation for details; in most cases, these are not important, but when they are, the
g4ui when=0 command can be used to execute the necessary Geant4 commands.
• Geant4 tracking requires that the simulated world’s geometry be a rigorous hierarchical
structure; violations of this requirement can cause gross tracking errors. By default, G4beamline
performs a geometry test to check for invalid volume overlaps and conformance to this
requirement; failures generate a warning but permit the simulation to proceed. The geometry
command controls its parameters. Section 9.2 discusses when these rules can be violated without
affecting the simulation results.
• The pseudo random number generator is normally seeded with the event number immediately
before starting to process an event. The generator used has excellent properties when seeded with
integers from 0 thru 900,000,000. This behavior can be changed via the randomseed command.
• As in real beamlines, shielding is required in realistic simulations. See section 8.9.
• Individual physics processes can be disabled via the disable and doStochastics arguments to the
physics command. A list of the physics processes used in the current physics list is available
from the list command.

5 Input File Description
A G4beamline simulation is completely specified in a single ASCII input file, plus whatever auxiliary
files it references (e.g. magnetic field maps, window profiles, etc.).

Each line in the input file is either a comment or a command. Comments are blank lines, lines beginning
with ‘#’, and lines beginning with ‘*’ (which are printed to stdout, giving a convenient method to
document your output files). Lines beginning with ‘/’ are commands passed directly to the Geant4 user
interface command interpreter (this happens before the geometry is initialized; see the g4ui command to
defer execution of Geant4 UI commands). Lines beginning with “!” are passed directly to the shell (with
the ‘!’ stripped). On any line, ‘#’ introduces a comment-to-end-of-line if it is preceded by a space or tab
and is not enclosed in quotes.

A command is a single line beginning with the command name (optionally preceded by white space),
followed by any number of arguments. Lines can be continued by preceding the ending newline with a
backslash (\). Commands can have any combination of positional and named arguments, which are
separated by white space (spaces or tabs). A named argument is of the form “name=value”, where the
name is like a C identifier except it can also contain the characters ‘+’ and ‘-’ (which are needed for
particle names). If spaces or tabs are present in the value, the entire value must be enclosed in single- or
double-quotes; this delimiter cannot appear in the value. Any argument that is not named is positional,
and its value can also be enclosed in single- or double-quotes; positional arguments are conventionally
given first, but can be intermixed with named arguments. The order of positional arguments is
important, but the order of named arguments is not.

This command has 2 named arguments:

param histoFile=histoscope.hst histoInterval=100000
This command has 1 positional and 4 named arguments:

tubs Target outerRadius=10 length=100 material=W color=1,1,1
This command has 3 positional arguments (the last 2 are each themselves a command that will be
invoked when the defined command MyMacro is used):

define MyMacro \

“tubs $1 outerRadius=10 length=100 material=$2  color=$3” \

“place $1”
That macro is used like this:

MyMacro TubsName Fe 1,0,1

Command files can be nested; see the include command.

Simple macros can be defined, with arguments; see the define command.

The value of a named or positional argument can come from a parameter by using a ‘$’:

param H=10.0 W=20.0 L=30.0

box BoxName width=$W height=$H length=$L
Note that $parameter substitution occurs only within the value of a parameter; this can be combined
with arithmetic expressions for numeric arguments:

box Box.$H.$W.$L width=$W+10 height=$H*2.0 length=sqrt($L)
