# `MAD-X` Modules
## Intra-Beam Scattering

The Intra-Beam Scattering command computes the contribution to emittance growth rates due to Coulomb scattering of particles within relativistic beams. The algorithms in this module have been derived from the formalism presented in 1982 by J.D. Bjorken and S.K. Mtingwa , and are also using the expansion of M. Conte and M. Martini developped in 1985, generalized to the case of nonzero vertical dispersion.

The present implementation of the IBS module in `MAD-X` is described in a forthcoming note .

The syntax of the `IBS` command is:

> 

The `IBS` command has one attribute:

outputs the resulting "ibs" table to the named file. (Default: "ibs")

The Bjorken-Mtingwa formalism takes into account the variation of the lattice parameters (beta and dispersion functions) around the machine and consequently, the knowledge of the optical functions along the machine is required: `IBS` should only be called after fully qualified `BEAM` command and a `TWISS` command.

**Warning:** Calling `EMIT` between the `TWISS` and `IBS` commands leads to `IBS` using wrong beam parameters, even if the `BEAM` command is reiterated.

The `IBS` module does not include a consistent treatment of linear betatron coupling.

The intra-beam scattering growth times are given by: = C_i (i = x, y, s) where $`C_i`$ accounts for some constants and the integrals for the scattering functions, N is the number of particles in the bunch, $`\gamma`$ is the relativistic factor and $`\epsilon_i`$ are the normalized emittances in the horizontal, vertical and longitudinal plane respectively. These key beam parameters must be specified through the `BEAM` command.

If the `CENTRE=true` option of `TWISS` was specified, the optical functions are calculated by `TWISS` at the center of each element and `IBS` uses these values for the element. If by default `TWISS` calculated the optical functions at the end of each element, `IBS` calculates the values at the center of each element by performing a linear interpolation between the end values for the previous element and the end values for the current element.

**Input of the beam parameters:**\
A number of parameters have to be present in the `BEAM` command in order to run the IBS module:

This is mandatory but `MAD-X` provides default value of `PARTICLE=proton`. For ions, this parameter specifies only the name of the ions, and the MASS (approximated to the atomic unit number times the neutron mass `NMASS`) and CHARGE must be provided as well.

the number of particles (or number of ions).

The definition of the energy (total, kinetic, total energy of the ions or energy per nucleon) is a difficult one. In the present approach, the energy is the **total** energy of the particle. For ions, the expected input is the **proton equivalent** energy, i.e. the total energy a proton would have when circulating in the defined machine. As an illustration, in the LHC, protons will be injected with an energy of 450 GeV. Consequently, to evaluate the growth times for Lead ions at injection in the LHC, one has to input `ENERGY=450*charge`.\
An important check for the correctness of the input is the printed value of the relativistic factor $`\gamma`$. The latter should correspond to: \_ion = \_proton

This part of the input is used to define the normalized horizontal, vertical and longitudinal emittances. The required parameters are the `physical` transverse emittances, `EX` and `EY`, and the longitudinal emittance `ET`.\
The longitudinal emittance is defined as the product of the bunch length `SIGT` times the relative energy spread `SIGE`, which are therefore required input.\
If only the longitudinal emittance is defined, and `SIGT` and `SIGE` are omitted, an active RF cavity is also necessary in the lattice to infer `SIGT` and `SIGE`.

**Example of BEAM input:**\
A beam of fully stripped Lead ions at the LHC injection energy may be defined as follows for `IBS` calculations:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> nucleon = 208;\
> charge = 82;\
> \
> BEAM, P̄ARTICLE= lead, CHARGE= charge, MASS= nucleon\*nmass,\
> ENERGY= 450\*charge, NPART= 1.1E7, BUNCHED,\
> EX= 7.82E-9, EY= 7.82E-9, SIGE= 4.68E-4, SIGT= 0.115;
>
> </div>

**Resulting Table and File:**\
The `IBS` command produces a table "ibs" containing the following data for each element of the machine: element name, position, optical functions (beta, alfa, dispersion and derivative) in both transverse planes, as well as the particular variables `DELS`, the length difference in meters between consecutive elements, and `TXI, TYI` and `TLI`, the IBS growth times in the two transverse and longitudinal planes.

This table can be accessed through the usual mechanisms. If the attribute `FILE="file_name"` is also given, `MAD-X` writes the table to the named file.

**Features:**\
The average growth rates in \[sec\] are defined as variables called `ibs.tx`, `ibs.ty`, `ibs.tl` for the horizontal, vertical and longitudinal growth times respectively. They are directly accessible as variables after the `IBS` command, e.g.

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> IBS;\
> Tx = ibs.tx;
>
> </div>

defines a variable Tx which is the average horizontal growth rate in seconds.

**Examples:**\
The two examples provided for the module Intra-Beam Scattering illustrate the commands required to run the module. The two examples have been selected such as to highlight the differences between a computation for protons and that for ions. Both examples compute the IBS growth times at injection into the LHC.\
The examples are located at <http://madx.web.cern.ch/madx/madX/examples/ibs/>.
