# `MAD-X` Modules
## Particle Tracking

<span id="chap:thintrack" label="chap:thintrack"></span>

### Introduction to `MAD-X` Tracking Modules

A number of particles with given initial conditions can be tracked through a beam-line or a ring. The particles can be tracked either for a single passage or for many turns.

While `MAD-X` keeps most of the functionality of `MAD-8`, the trajectory tracking in `MAD-X` is considerably modified compared to `MAD-8`. The reason is that in `MAD-8` the thick lens tracking is inherently not symplectic, which implies that the phase space volume is not preserved during the tracking, i.e. contrary to the real particle the tracked particle amplitude is either growing or decreasing.

The non-symplectic tracking as in `MAD-8` has been completely excluded from `MAD-X` by taking out the thick lens part from the tracking modules. Instead two types of tracking modules (both symplectic) are implemented into `MAD-X`.

The first part of this design decision is the thin-lens tracking module ([`THINTRACK`](#sec:trackoverview)) which tracks symplecticly through drifts and kicks and by replacing the end effects by their symplectic part in the form of an additional kick on either end of the element. This method requires a preliminary conversion of a sequence with thick elements into one composed of thin elements (see the [`MAKETHIN`](#chap:makethin) command).

The second part of this design decision is to produce a thick lens tracking module based on the `PTC` code of E. Forest that allows a symplectic treatment of all accelerator elements giving the user full control over the precision (number of steps and integration type) and exactness (full or extended Hamiltonian) of the results.

The first `PTC` thick-lens tracking module is named [PTC_TRACK](#sec:ptc-track). It has the same features as the thin-lens tracking code ([thintrack](#sec:trackoverview)) except that it treats thick-lenses in a symplectic manner.

There is a second `PTC` tracking module called the line tracking module ([`PTC_TRACKLINE`](#sec:ptc-trackline)). It was developped for tracking particles in [CLIC](http://clic-study.web.cern.ch/CLIC-Study/), with the specificities that it can deal with beam-lines containing traveling-wave cavities and includes actual beam acceleration.

### Overview of Thin-Lens Tracking

The **thin-lens tracking module** of `MAD-X` performs element per element tracking of one or several particle trajectories in the last [`USE`](#sec:use)d sequence.

Only thin elements are allowed (apart from the element `DRIFT`), which guarantees the symplecticity of the coordinate transformation. Any lattice can be converted into a "thin element" lattice by invoking the [`MAKETHIN`](#chap:makethin) command.

Several commands are actually required to complete a tracking run:

> 

Inside the block `TRACK`-`ENDTRACK` a series of initial trajectory coordinates can be specified by the `START` command (as many commands as trajectories). This will be usually done in a `WHILE`-loop. **Note** that the coordinates are either **canonical** coordinates or **action-angle** variables!

For usual tracking (single/multi-turn), all coordinates are specified with respect to the actual closed orbit (possibly off-momentum, with magnet errors) and **NOT** with respect to the reference orbit.

If the option `ONEPASS` is used, the coordinates are specified with respect to the reference orbit. The name `ONEPASS` might be misleading: Still tracking can be single- or multi-turn!

The tracking is actually started with the `RUN` command, where the option `TURNS` defines for how many turns the particles will be tracked in the given sequence.

If the option `DUMP` is used, the particle coordinates are written to files at each turn. The output files are named automatically. The name given by the user is followed by `.obsnnnn` (observation point), followed by `.pnnnn` (particle number).\
Hence filenames look like `track.obs0001.p0001`.

Tracking creates a number of internal tables and can create files on disk: `TRACKSUMM, TRACKLOSS`, and `TRACKONE` or `TRACK.OBS$$$$.P$$$$` (depending on the attribute `ONETABLE` of the `RUN` command) `ONLY_AVERAGE` when used with ONETABLE it will only output the average of all the particles.

These internal tables can be accessed via the [`TABLE`](#chap:tables)-access functions.

Plotting of particle coordinates or other data in these tables is possible in `MAD-X`. Plotting can also be done with external programs by using the files created by `TRACK`.

`MAD-X` also has the capability to treat space-charge during tracking runs. There is no space-charge command per se but space charge is controlled through several options of `MAD-X`(see [`OPTION`](#sec:option)) and specific attributes of the [`RUN`](#sec:run) command in this `TRACK` environment. A section specific to space charge options and particularities appears below.

### TRACK

The `TRACK` command initiates trajectory tracking by entering the thin-lens tracking module.

> 

The attributes of the TRACK command are:

relative momentum offset for reference closed orbit (switched off for `ONEPASS`)\
Defining a non-zero `DELTAP` results in a change of the beam momentum/energy without changing the magnetic properties in the sequence, which leads to an off-momentum closed orbit different from the on-momentum reference orbit. Particle coordinates are then given with respect to this new closed orbit, unless the option `ONEPASS=true` is used!\
(Default: 0.0)

flag to ensure that no closed orbit search is done, which also means that no stability test is done. This is always the case for transfer lines, but this option can also be enabled for multi-turn tracking of a circular machine. `ONEPASS=true` does **NOT** restrict tracking to a single turn.\
With `ONEPASS=true`, the particle coordinates are specified with respect to the reference orbit.\
With `ONEPASS=false`, the closed orbit is calculated and the particle coordinates are given with respect to the closed orbit coordinates.\
This flag affects the behavior of the [`BBORBIT`](#sec:option) flag.\
The name of this attribute is misleading but was kept for backwards compatibility.\
(Default: false)

flag to introduce synchrotron damping (needs RF cavity and flag `RADIATE` in the `BEAM` command).\
(Default: false)

flag to introduce quantum excitation via random number generator and tables look-up (`SYNRAD` $`=1`$, see ref. ) or polynomial interpolation (`SYNRAD` $`=2`$, see ref. ) for photon emission. The choice of the generator can be selected via the command [`OPTION`](#sec:option) attribute `SYNRAD`.\
(Default: 2)

If `QUANTUM` is true, it selects a particular sequence of random values. A `SEED` value is an integer in the range \[0...999999999\] (default: 123456789). Note that the seed set with this command is shared with the [`COPTION`](#sec:coption) and [`EOPTION`](#sec:coption) commands. See also: [Random Values](#subsubsec:random).

flag to write the particle coordinates in files, whose names are generated automatically.\
(Default: false)

a logical flag to trigger aperture check at the entrance of each element (except `DRIFT`s). A particle is lost from the table of tracked particles if its position lies outside the aperture of the current element at the entrance of this element.\
(Default: false)\
The [`APERTYPE`](#chap:aperture) and [`APERTURE`](#chap:aperture) information of each element in the sequence is used to assess the particle loss. However `TRACK` only takes into account the predefined aperture types listed in table <a href="#table:apertype" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="table:apertype">5.1</a>\
Note that if no aperture information was specified for an element, the following procedure still takes place:\
$`\rightarrow`$ No aperture definition for element $`\rightarrow`$ Default apertype/aperture assigned (currently this is `APERTYPE=circle, APERTURE={0}`)\
$`\rightarrow`$ If tracking with `APERTURE` is used and an element with `APERTYPE=circle` AND `APERTURE={0}` is encountered, then the first value of the `MAXAPER` vector is assigned as the circle’s radius (no permanent assignment!). See option [`MAXAPER`](#sec:run) for the default values.\
$`\Rightarrow`$ Hence even if no aperture information is specified by the user for certain elements, default values will be used!

flag to write all particle coordinates in a single file instead of one file per particle.\
(Default: false)

flag to create in memory a table named "trackloss" containing the coordinates of lost particles.\
(Default: false)\
Traditionally, when a particle is lost on the aperture, this information is written to stdout. To allow more flexible tracking studies, the coordinates of lost particles and additional information can also be saved in a table in memory. Usually one would save this table to a file using the `WRITE` command after the tracking run has finished. The following information is available in the TFS table "trackloss":

- Particle ID (number)

- Turn number

- Particle coordinates (x,px,y,py,t,pt)

- Longitudinal position in the machine (s)

- Beam energy

- Element name, where the particle is lost

name for the track table. The default name is different depending on the value of the `ONETABLE` attribute.\
(Default: "track" if `ONETABLE=true`, "trackone" if `ONETABLE=false`)

flag to trigger parameter update per turn.\
(Default: false)\
Specifying `UPDATE=true` gives access to the following additions:

this special variable contains the turn number; it can be used in expressions like `KICK := SIN(tr$turni)` and is updated at each turn during tracking.

this special macro can be user-defined and is executed/updated at each turn, during tracking. A macro structure is necessary to provide for table access. *e.g.*\
` tr$macro(turn): macro={`\
`commands that can depend on the turnnumber;`\
`}; `

**Remarks**\
*IMPORTANT:* If an RF cavity has a non-zero voltage, synchrotron oscillations are automatically included. If tracking with constant momentum is desired, then the voltage of the RF cavities has to be set to zero. If an RF cavity has a no zero voltage and `DELTAP` is non zero, tracking is done with synchrotron oscillations around an off-momentum closed orbit.

### START

After the `TRACK` command, initial trajectory coordinates must be provided for each trajectory or particle to be tracked, with one `START` command per trajectory or particle.

The coordinates can be expressed as either [**canonical**](#subsec:tables-canon) or **action-angle** coordinates.

> 

For the case of action-angle coordinates, the normalised amplitudes are expressed in number of r.m.s. beam size $`F_X`$, $`F_Y`$, $`F_T`$ (the actions being computed with the emittances given in the `BEAM` command) **in each mode plane**. The phases are $`\Phi_X`$, $`\Phi_Y`$ and $`\Phi_T`$ expressed in radian. In the uncoupled case, we have in the plane mode labelled z, and with $`E_z`$ being the r.m.s. emittance in that plane:\
``` math
\begin{equation}
Z = F_z \sqrt E_z \cos\Phi_z , \qquad P_z= F_z \sqrt E_z \sin\Phi_z
\end{equation}
```

The attributes of the START command are:

canonical coordinates.

action-angle coordinates.

**Remarks**\
For usual tracking (single/multi-turn), all coordinates are specified with respect to the actual closed orbit (possibly off-momentum, with magnet errors) and **NOT** with respect to the reference orbit.

If the option `onepass` of the `TRACK` is used, the coordinates are specified with respect to the reference orbit.

### OBSERVE

During the tracking process, particle coordinates at specific named locations along the machine can be printed to file(s). The declaration of an observation point is with the OBSERVE command:

> 

The single attribute of `OBSERVE` is:

the name of the observation point.

Several `OBSERVE` commands can be given for the same tracking job, one per observation point.

If no `OBSERVE` command is given in a tracking job, but the `DUMP` option in the `TRACK` command is used, the trajectory coordinates are still recorded and one observation point is provided at the starting point of the sequence.

The output files are named automatically. The name given by the user (attribute `FILE` of the `TRACK` command) is followed by ".obsnnnn", where nnnn is the observation point number, and followed by ".pnnnn" wherer nnnn is now the particle number. Hence the default filename for the first obseration point and first particle looks like `track.obs0001.p0001`.

### RUN

The actual tracking is triggered by the `RUN` command.

> 

The `RUN` command has three attributes:

number of turns to be tracked.

defines the maximum aperture (by aperture type) beyond which the particle is considered to be lost upper and, in addition, limits for the six coordinates.\
(Default: {0.1, 0.01, 0.1, 0.01, 1.0, 0.1}\
The limits defined by the `MAXAPER` option are only being taken into account if the `APERTURE` option of the `TRACK` command is used.

defines the turn periodicity for printing coordinates at observation points. (Default: 1)\
`FFILE=n` will print coordinates every n-th turn only.

a logical flag to keep data from previous tracking and append new results to tables. (Default: false)

is used to calculate the maximum time difference before a particle is considered lost ($`t_{max}`$). $`t_{max} =\frac{C}{h_{track}*\beta}`$ where $`h_{track}`$=TRACK_HARMON and $`C`$ is the total length of the machine. (Default: 1)

### DYNAP

The `DYNAP` command calculates tunes, tune footprints, smear and Lyapunov exponent from tracking data. `DYNAP` can be called instead of `RUN` inside a `TRACK` command environment.

> 

For each previously entered start command, `DYNAP` tracks two close-by particles over a selected number of turns (minimum 64 and maximum 1024), from which it obtains the betatron tunes with error, the action smear, and an estimate of the lyapunov exponent. Many such companion particle-pairs can be tracked at the same time, which speeds up the calculation.

The *smear* is defined as $`2 \times (\ wxy_{max} - wxy_{min}\ ) / (\ wxy_{max} + wxy_{min}\ )`$, where the $`wxy_{min,max}`$ refer to the minimum and maximum values of the sum of the transverse betatron invariants $`wx+wy`$ during the tracking.

The tunes are computed by using an FFT and formula (18) in reference if the number of turns is 64 or less, or formula (25) in the same reference if the number of turns is strictly larger than 64.

`DYNAP` has the following attributes:

the number of turns to be tracked (Default: 64, minimum: 64 and maximum: 1024).

a logical flag to compute the tunes. (Default: false)

a vector of 6 real numbers defining the maximum aperture beyond which the particle is considered to be lost.\
(Default: {0.1, 0.01, 0.1, 0.01, 1.0, 0.1}

the initial distance which is added to the *x* coordinate of the companion particle of every particle declared with `START` commands. (Default: 1.e-7 m)

A logical flag. If set, the flag *orbit* is true during the tracking and its initialization (default: true). **This flag should be set to be true, if normalized coordinates are to be entered.**

The first command defines the beam parameters. It is essential that the longitudinal emittance `ET` is set. The command `USE` selects the beam line or sequence. The `TRACK` command activates the tracking module, `START` enters the starting coordinates (more than one particle can be defined), `DYNAP` finally tracks two nearby particles with an initial distance equal to the value of the ` LYAPUNOV` attribute for each `START` definition over `TURNS` revolutions, and `ENDTRACK` terminates the execution of the tracking module.

The results are stored in the `DYNAP` and `DYNAPTUNE` tables, and can be obtained by the two commands

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> VALUE, T̄ABLE(dynap,smear);\
> VALUE, TABLE(dynaptune,tunx),\
> TABLE(dynaptune,tuny),\
> TABLE(dynaptune,dtune);
>
> </div>

More generally, all results can be printed to a file, using the commands

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> WRITE, TABLE=dynap, FILE;\
> WRITE, TABLE=dynaptune, FILE;
>
> </div>

The output file `lyapunov.data` lists the turn number and phase distance between the two Lyapunov partners, respectively, allowing for visual inspection of chaoticity.

### ENDTRACK

Tracking is terminated by the command `ENDTRACK` with no attributes.

> 

### Space Charge

`MAD-X` can perform tracking using a frozen space charge model. This process is rather involved and requires careful setting of several options and switches as well as the insertion of space-charge kicks inserted within regular elements. The Space-Charge specifics of `MAD-X` are documented in .
