# `MAD-X` Modules
## SURVEY

The `SURVEY` command computes the geometrical layout, *i.e.* the coordinates of all machine elements in a [global reference system](#sec:global-ref). These coordinates can be used for installation. In order to produce coordinates in a particular system, the initial coordinates and angles can be specified.

> 

The `SURVEY` command has the following attributes:

the name of sequence to be surveyed \[Note: this attribute is actually ignored in favor of previous `USE`\]. By default the last sequence expanded with the `USE` command will be surveyed.

the name of external file to which the results are written.\
(Default: survey)

the initial horizontal, vertical and longitudinal coordinates in meters.\
(Default: 0.0, 0.0, 0.0)

the initial horizontal and vertical angles and transverse tilt in radians.\
(Default: 0.0, 0.0, 0.0)

The computation results are written on the internal table named "survey". Results can also be written on an external file. Each line contains the global coordinates of an element taken at the end of the element.

The computation takes into account the length of each element, as well as the rotation angles defined for [`SBEND`](#bend-sbend), [`RBEND`](#bend-rbend), thin [`MULTIPOLE`](#sec:multipole) and thin [`RFMULTIPOLE`](#sec:rfmultipole) elements exclusively. Rotation angles introduced via the `KNL`, `KSL` mechanism for other elements are ignored by `SURVEY`, other `MAD-X` commands, as well as `PTC` commands.

**Example:** average LHC ring with CERN coordinates.

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> REAL CONST R0 = 1.0; ! to obtain the average ring\
> USE, SEQUENCE=lhcb1;\
> SURVEY, X̄0=-2202.21027, Y0=2359.00656, Z0=2710.63882,\
> THETA0=-4.315508007, PHI0=0.0124279564, PSI0=-0.0065309236,\
> FILE=survey.lhcb1;
>
> </div>

**WARNING :**\
In the case a machine geometry is constructed with thick lenses, the circumference changes when the structure is converted into thin lenses via the [`MAKETHIN`](#chap:makethin) command. This is an unavoidable feature of `MAKETHIN`. ONLY the structure with thick lenses must be used for practical purposes.
