# `MAD-X` Modules
## Twiss Module

The `TWISS` command calculates the [linear lattice functions](#subsec:tables-linear) , and optionally the [chromatic functions](#subsec:tables-chrom). The coupled functions are calculated in the sense of Edwards and Teng. For the uncoupled cases they reduce to the C and S functions.

> 

The attributes of the `TWISS` command are:

the name of a valid sequence for which the calculation of optical functions should be performed.\
`SEQUENCE` and `LINE` are mutually exclusive.\
(Default: sequence or beam line defined in the latest `USE` command)

the name of a valid beamline for which the calculation of optical functions should be performed.\
`SEQUENCE` and `LINE` are mutually exclusive.\
(Default: sequence or beam line defined in the latest `USE` command)

(Default: `#S/#E`)\
The `TWISS` calculation is restricted to the specified range. See [`RANGE`](#sec:range).

=`real{,real}` or `initial:final:step` (Default: 0.0)\
The relative energy error `DELTAP` may be entered in one of the two forms above.\
The first form lists several numbers, which may be general expressions, separated by commas. The second form specifies an initial value, a final value, and a step, which must be constant expressions, separated by colons.\
For example, `DELTAP=0.001` defines a single value, `DELTAP=0.001,0.005` defines two values and `DELTAP=0.001:0.007:0.002` defines four values.

a logical flag to trigger computation of the [chromatic functions](#subsec:tables-chrom) as well as the radiation synchrotron integrals.\
*Please note that the calculation is done without taking coupling into account. In case of coupled lattice the warning isissued that the calculation of chromatic functions can be inaccurate!*\
*Please note that this option also changes the way that the chromaticities are calculated: The chromaticities are normally calculated from the analysis of the first and second order matrices. With `CHROM`, the chromaticities are recalculated by explicitely calculating the tunes for the case of the specified momentum deviation `DELTAP` and for the case of a momentum deviation equal to `DELTAP`+1.e-6. The tune differences divided by 1.e-6 yield the chromaticities.*

a logical flag to enforce the calculation of the [linear lattice functions](#subsec:tables-linear) at the center of the element instead of the end of the element. The values in the tables and in the output files are affected by this flag.\
(Default: false)\
*Since the lattice functions are calculated inside the element the closed orbit coordinates in the output also include the misalignment of the element.*

the maximum closed orbit error, for all six orbit components, that can be tolerated during the closed orbit search. The value given in the `TWISS` command is only valid for the current calculation; the [`COGUESS`](#sec:coguess) command allows to change the default value for all subsequent closed orbit search calculations.\
(Default: 1.e-6)

causes `MAD-X` to write a [TFS Twiss table](#chap:tfs) to the file specified. (Default: “twiss”)\
The columns of the table can be selected using the `SELECT` command with the `FLAG=twiss` attribute.

the name of the table where [linear lattice functions](#subsec:tables-linear) as well as [chromatic functions](#subsec:tables-chrom) are stored. (Default: “twiss”)\
**Note:** If the `TABLE` option is given the selection of column names via the `SELECT` command is ignored. Hence if both `TABLE` and `FILE` options are given, the table written to file is the full twiss table, containing all elements as rows and all known Twiss parameters as columns.

logical flag to prevent the creation of the internal twiss table. Consequently, no output file is created either.\
(Default: false)

If this flag is used the the one-turn map at the location of every element is calculated and prepared for storage in the twiss table. Using the [`SELECT`](#sec:select) command and using the column `RE, RE11 …RE16 …RE61 …RE66` these components will be added to the twiss table, i.e. with `"COLUMN, RE"` and `"COLUMN, REij"` one gets all or the component "ij" respectively.

a logical flag to initiate the calculation of a [sector map](#sec:sectormap). Default the Rij contains feed-down from higher order maps. In order to turn it off use the flag SECTORPURE.

a logical flag to save composition of maps instead of individual maps of a [sector map](#sec:sectormap).

a logical flag to save the transfer map Rij without effects from higher order map (Tijk). This option should be used to get it in the correct format for TRAIN.

the name of the table containing the `SECTORMAP` values. The elements (lines) and parameters (columns) of the table can be tailored using the [`SELECT`](#sec:select) command as specified in [`SECTORMAP`](#sec:sectormap)\
(Default: sectortable)

the name of the file to which the `SECTORMAP` is written. In order to specify the output use the SECTORTABLE as specified in [`SECTORMAP`](#sec:sectormap)\
(Default: "sectormap")

a logical flag to output the eigenvectors in the beginning of the sequence. Multiplying with this matrix brings normalized coordinates to physical coordinates.

the name of the file to which the `EIGENVECTOR` is written.

The keeporbit attribute (with an optional name, keeporbit="name") stores the orbit under this name at the start, and at all monitors.

The useorbit attribute (with an optional name, useorbit="name") uses the start value provided for the closed orbit search; the values at the monitors are used by the threader.

(obsolete) This `MAD-8` option can no longer be set since TWISS in `MAD-X` is always calculated in coupled mode. `MAD-X` computes the coupled functions in the sense of Edwards and Teng . For the uncoupled cases they reduce to the C and S functions.

*Twiss calculation is 4D only!* : The `TWISS` command calculates an approximate 6D closed orbit when the accelerator structure includes an active [cavity](#sec:rfcavity). However, the calculation of the Twiss parameters are 4D only. This may result in apparently non-closure of the beta values in the plane with non-zero dispersion. The full 6D Twiss parameters can be calculated with the [PTC_TWISS](#chap:ptc-twiss) command.

This flag calculates the Ripken-Mais Twiss parameters (`beta11, beta12, beta21, beta22, alfa11, alfa12, alfa21, alfa22, gamma11, gamma12, gamma21` and `gamma22`) using the parameters `betx, bety, alfx, alfy,`\
`gamax, gamay, R11, R12, R21` and `R22` as input.

Adjust the strength of the quadrupoles and sextupoles in order to compensate for the offset in energy. The phase of the RF is also adjusted in order to find a closed 6D orbit. The change of the attributes are stored in k1tap, k2tap etc.

The tables are suitable for [`PLOT`](#chap:plot).

After a successful `TWISS` run `MAD-X` creates a table of summary parameters named "SUMM" which includes tunes, chromaticities, etc. versus the selected values of `DELTAP`. Please note that with the `CHROM` attribute the calculation is done without taking coupling into account. In case of coupled lattice the warning isissued that the calculation of chromatic functions can be inaccurate!

Notice also that in `MAD-X`, `DELTAP` is converted to `PT`, which is used as longitudinal variable. Dispersive and chromatic functions are hence derivatives with respect to `PT`. (see [summ table](#subsec:tables-summ)).

These summary parameters can later be accessed via the [table access functions](#chap:tables) using the "SUMM" table.

### Twiss Parameters for a Period

The simplest form of the `TWISS` command is

> 

which calculates the periodic solution for the last beamline or sequence declared in a `USE` statement, and with zero `DELTAP`. Chromatic functions are not calculated. Standard tables ("TWISS" and "SUMM") are created in memory but no file is written to disk.

The slightly more elaborate version

> 

computes the periodic solution, including chromatic functions, for the last beam line or sequence declared in a `USE` statement, for all values of DELTAP entered (or for `DELTAP=0`, if none is entered). The tables "tabname" and "SUMM" are created in memory and no file is written to disk.

**Example:**

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> USE, period=OCT;\
> TWISS, DELTAP=0.001, CHROM;
>
> </div>

computes the periodic solution for the linear lattice and chromatic functions for the beam line OCT and for DELTAP=0.001.

### Initial Values from a Periodic Line

It is possible to track the lattice functions starting with the periodic solution for another beam line. If this is desired the TWISS command takes the form

> 

No other attributes should appear in the command. For each value of DELTAP, `MAD-X` first searches for the periodic solution for the beam line mentioned in LINE=beamline: The result is used as an initial condition for the lattice function tracking.

**Example:**

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> xxxxxxxx̄ CELL: LINE=(...);\
> INSERT: LINE=(...);\
> USE, period=INSERT;\
> TWISS, LINE=CELL, DELTAP=0.0:0.003:0.001, CHROM, FILE;
>
> </div>

For four values of DELTAP the following happens: First `MAD-X` finds the periodic solution for the beam line CELL: Then it uses this solution as initial conditions for tracking the lattice functions of the beamline CELL: Output is also written on the file TWISS:

If any of the beam lines was defined with formal arguments, actual arguments must be provided:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> CELL(SF,SD): L̄INE=(...);\
> INSERT(X): LINE=(...);\
> USE, period=INSERT;\
> TWISS, LINE=CELL(SF1,SD1);
>
> </div>

### Given Initial Values

Initial values for [linear lattice functions](#subsec:tables-linear) and [chromatic functions](#subsec:tables-chrom) may also be numerical. Initial values can be specified on the `TWISS` command:

> 

All initial values for [linear lattice functions](#subsec:tables-linear) and [chromatic functions](#subsec:tables-chrom) are permitted, but `BETX` and `BETY` are required. Moreover, a [BETA0](#sec:beta0) block can be added as filled by the [`SAVEBETA`](#sec:savebeta) command (see below). The lattice parameters are taken from this block, but are also overwritten by lattice parameters explicitly decalred on the command line. As entered, the initial conditions cannot depend on `DELTAP`, and can thus be correct only for one such value.

### SAVEBETA

Initial lattice parameters can be saved and transfered for later commands, in particular for [`TWISS`](#chap:twiss) or the [match module](#chap:match), with the `SAVEBETA` command sequence.

> 

marks a location given by attribute `PLACE` in an expanded sequence `sequence_name`; at the next `TWISS` command execution, a [`BETA0`](#sec:beta0) block is saved at that location with the label given by the attribute `LABEL`. This is done only once; in order to get a new `BETA0` block at the same location in a subsequent `TWISS` command, the `SAVEBETA` command must be repeated. The content of the `BETA0` block can then be used in other commands, *e.g.* `TWISS` and `MATCH`.

**Example** (after sequence expansion):

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> SAVEBETA, LABEL=sb1, PLACE=mb\[5\], SEQUENCE=fivecell;\
> TWISS;\
> SHOW, sb1;
>
> </div>

saves and then shows the `BETA0` block parameters at the end (!) of the fifth element of type `mb` in the sequence.

Parameters in tables can also be accessed using the [table access](#chap:tables) functions.

    USE, period=...;
    SAVEBETA, LABEL=name, PLACE=place, SEQUENCE=s_name;
    TWISS,...;

When reaching the `PLACE` in the sequence `s_name` during execution of [`TWISS`](#chap:twiss), `MAD-X` saves a [BETA0](#sec:beta0) block with the `LABEL` name: This block is filled with the values of all lattice parameters in place.

**Example 1:**

    USE, period=CELL;
    SAVEBETA, LABEL=END, PLACE=#E, SEQUENCE=CELL;
    TWISS;
    USE, period=INSERT;
    TWISS, BETA0=END;

This first example calculates the [periodic solution](#sec:twissperiod) of the line `CELL`, and then tracks lattice parameters through `INSERT`, using all end conditions (including orbit) in `CELL` at the start of `INSERT`.

**Example 2:**

    USE, period=CELL;
    SAVEBETA, LABEL=END, PLACE=#E, SEQUENCE=CELL;
    TWISS;
    USE, period=INSERT;
    TWISS, BETX=END->BETY, BETY=END->BETX;

This is similar to the first example,but the beta functions are interchanged (overwritten).

### BETA0: Set Initial Lattice Parameters

Initial lattice parameters can be set ’manually’ for later commands, in particular for [`TWISS`](#chap:twiss) or the [`MATCH`](#chap:match) module, by using the `BETA0` command attached to a label.

> 

A `BETA0` block can be used as a whole with all values declared, as a block with overriden values explicitly, or by extracting single values as shown in the three examples below:

Example of `BETA0` block used as a whole in `TWISS`:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> initial: BETA0, B̄ETX=10., ALFX=0.0, MUX=0.0,\
> BETY=10., ALFY=0.0, MUY=0.0,\
> DX=1., DPX=0.0;\
> TWISS, BETA0=initial;
>
> </div>

Example of `BETA0` block used as a whole but with overriden values in the `TWISS` command:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> initial: BETA0, B̄ETX=10., ALFX=0.0, MUX=0.0,\
> BETY=10., ALFY=0.0, MUY=0.0,\
> DX=1., DPX=0.0;\
> TWISS, BETA0=initial, ALFX=-0.1, ALFY=0.1;
>
> </div>

Example of using `BETA0` block by extracting single values in the `TWISS` command:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> initial: BETA0, B̄ETX=10., ALFX=0.0, MUX=0.0,\
> BETY=10., ALFY=0.0, MUY=0.0,\
> DX=1., DPX=0.0;\
> TWISS, BETX=initial-$`>`$BETX, BETY=initial-$`>`$BETY;
>
> </div>

### Sectormap output

The flag `SECTORMAP` of the `TWISS` command causes a file "sectormap" to be written.

For each user-selected element, it contains the user-selected coefficients of the kick vector `K` ($`6`$ values), of the first-order map `R` ($`6\times6`$ values) and of the second-order map `T` ($`6\times6\times6`$ values) If only certain elemenents and values are desired a SELECT command can be used. Note that it should be used on the TABLE as shown in the following example:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> TWISS,,SECTORMAP,SECTORTABLE=my_sect_table; SELECT, FLAG=my_sect_table, COLUMN=name, pos, k1, r11, r66, t111; WRITE, TABLE=my_sect_table, FILE="sectormap.tfs";
>
> </div>

The sectormap file contains for each selected element, one element per line, the set of chosen K, R, and T matrix coefficients:\
\

|          |      |                       |
|:---------|:-----|:----------------------|
| @ NAME   | %13s | "MY_SECT_TABLE"       |
| @ TYPE   | %09s | "SECTORMAP"           |
| @ TITLE  | %08s | "no-title"            |
| @ ORIGIN | %19s | "MAD-X 3.04.62 Linux" |
| @ DATE   | %08s | "18/12/08"            |
| @ TIME   | %08s | "10.33.58"            |

\
\

|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|
| \* NAME | POS | K1 | R11 | R66 | T111 |
| \$ %s | %le | %le | %le | %le | %le |
| "FIVECELL\$START" | 0 | 0 | 1 | 1 | 0 |
| "SEQSTART" | 0 | 0 | 1 | 1 | 0 |
| "QF.1" | 3.1 | -1.305314637e-05 | 1.042224745 | 1 | 0 |
| "DRIFT_0" | 3.265 | 7.451656548e-21 | 1 | 1 | 0 |
| "MSCBH" | 4.365 | -1.686090613e-15 | 0.9999972755 | 1 | 0.006004411526 |
| "CBH.1" | 4.365 | 0 | 1 | 1 | 0 |
| "DRIFT_1" | 5.519992305 | -6.675347543e-21 | 1 | 1 | 0 |
| "MB" | 19.72000769 | 2.566889547e-18 | 1.000000091 | 1 | -4.135903063e-25 |
| "DRIFT_2" | 21.17999231 | -1.757758802e-20 | 1 | 1 | 0 |
| "MB" | 35.38000769 | 2.822705549e-18 | 1.000000091 | 1 | -4.135903063e-25 |
| "DRIFT_2" | 36.83999231 | 2.480880093e-20 | 1 | 1 | 0 |
| "MB" | 51.04000769 | 3.006954115e-18 | 1.000000091 | 1 | -4.135903063e-25 |
| "DRIFT_3" | 52.21 | -4.886652187e-20 | 1 | 1 | 0 |
| ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... |
| ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... |
| ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... |

\
\
Of course, the `SELECT` statement can be combined with additional options to filter-out the list of elements, such as in the following statement, which for instance only retains drift-type elements:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> SELECT, F̄LAG=my_sect_table, CLASS=drift,\
> COLUMN=name, pos, k1, r11, r66, t111;
>
> </div>

`K` coefficients range: `K1`... `K6`

`R` coefficients range:

|       |     |       |
|:-----:|:---:|:-----:|
| `R11` | ... | `R61` |
| `R12` | ... | `R62` |
|  ...  | ... |  ...  |
| `R16` | ... | `R66` |

`T` coefficients range:

|        |     |        |
|:------:|:---:|:------:|
| `T111` | ... | `T611` |
| `T121` | ... | `T621` |
|  ...   | ... |  ...   |
| `T161` | ... | `T661` |
| `T112` | ... | `T612` |
|  ...   | ... |  ...   |
| `T166` | ... | `T666` |

In the above notation, `Rij` stands for "effect on the `i`-th coordinate of the `j`-th coordinate in phase-space", whereas `Tijk` stands for "combined effect on the `i`-th coordinate of both the `j`-th and `k`-th coordinates in phase-space" along the lattice.

The maps are the accumulated maps between the selected elements. They contain both the alignment, and field errors present. Together with the starting value of the closed orbit (which can be obtained from the standard twiss file) this allows the user to track particles over larger sectors, rather than element per element. Note that effects of the higher order are included in the Rij. In order to disable this use the flag SECTORPURE. This flag should be activated when used to interface TRAIN.

### Beam Threader

In a machine with magnetic and alignment errors it can happen that the beam does not circulate and the closed orbit cannot be established and measured. This can also happen in `MAD-X` and the closed orbit finder does not converge.

The `THREADER` simulates beam steering through such a machine with repeated measurement of trajectory over a certain number of monitors and correction of the trajectory with upstream correctors.

When enabled, threading is executed whenever a trajectory or closed orbit search is carried out by the [TWISS](#chap:twiss) module.

The threader is controlled as an option. The following `MAD-X` command enables the threader:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> OPTION, THREADER;
>
> </div>

and the threader can be disabled with

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> OPTION, -THREADER;
>
> </div>

During the trajectory search in [`TWISS`](#chap:twiss), or the first turn of the orbit search for a closed machine, the threader calculates at each monitor the difference between the present trajectory reading and a reference value. If the difference exceeds a threshold (see below), the threader searches backwards for the first corrector that will efficiently cancel the difference and calculates the corresponding kick. The trajectory is then recalculated starting again from that corrector and progressing forward. The calculated kicks are added to already existing kicks. If Twiss is searching for a closed orbit which involves tracking this trajectory over many turns, the threader is only active during the first turn.

The reference value for the trajectory difference is zero by default but can also be obtained from a previous orbit calculation if the current `TWISS` command has the `USEORBIT` flag enabled and a previous `TWISS` command had the `KEEPORBIT` flag enabled. This allows for example to thread the beam into a machine with orbit bumps present.

The threshold values for triggering the threader correction can be set with the command

> 

where

threshold orbit excursions beyond which the threader is applied.\
Defaults: 0.005, 0.005

attenuation factor for the kicks applied by the threader\
Default: 1.0

The attenuation factor defines the fraction of the calculated kick that is actually applied by the threader. An attenuation factor of 0.5 will apply 50% of the calculated kicks.

### Closed Orbit Guess

In order to help the initial finding of the closed orbit by the `TWISS` module, it is possible to specify an initial guess for the coordinates of the fixed point at the start of the lattice.

> 

The `COGUESS` command has the following attributes:

each parameter specified defines a first guess for all future closed orbit searches in case they are different from zero.

sets the required convergence precision in the closed orbit search.\
(Default: 1.e-6)

a flag to reset the tolerance to its default value and to cancel the effect of a previous `COGUESS` in defining a first guess for subsequent closed orbit searches.\
(Default: false)

**Example**\

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> COGUESS, X=1.e-3;\
> ...\
> TWISS;\
> ...\
> COGUESS, Y=-2.e-3;\
> ...\
> TWISS;\
> ...\
> COGUESS, CLEAR;\
> ...\
> TWISS;\
> ...\
>
> </div>

### Coupling

In order to calculate Twiss parameters ($`\beta`$, $`\alpha`$ and $`\phi`$) MAD-X uses Edwards-Teng approach.

For coupled motion the matrix transformation can be written in a form $`M = VUV^{-1}`$, where $`M`$ is a symplectic 1-turn map, $`U`$ is a symplectic decoupled block-diagonal matrix, $`V`$ is a symplectic "rotation" matrix. Initial coupling parameters are calclulated based on decoupled $`U`$ matrix.

Given that $`M_1`$ is the one-turn matrix at point 1, $`M_2`$ is the one-turn matrix at point 2 , and we know $`M_{12}`$, the transfer matrix between points 1 and 2, we can express the change of the one-turn map from point 1 to point 2 by $`M_2 = M_{12}M_1M^{-1}_{12}`$. Then $`U_2 = V_2^{-1}M_2V_2 = V_2^{-1} {\color{blue}M_{12}M_1M^{-1}_{12}} V_2 = ( V_2^{-1} M_{12} {\color{blue}V_1) U_1 (V_1^{-1}} M^{-1}_{12} V_2)`$.

So, $`U_2 = W_{12} U_1 W_{12}^{-1} \textrm{, where } W_{12} \equiv V_2^{-1} M_{12}  V_1`$ Knowing $`V_1`$ and $`M_{12}`$ (transfer matrix of the element), we can calculate $`V_2 W_{12} = M_{12} V_1,`$ where we use $`V_{2}`$ for computing the coupling parameters and $`W_{12}`$ to propagate to the end of the element. One can find $`V_2`$ such that $`W_{12}`$ is block-diagonal or off block-diagonal.

For weakly coupled lattice MAD-X always uses **block-diagonal** solution, i.e. large tune (mode1) is associated with x-plane, and smaller tune (mode2) is associated with y-plane by convention. For a highly coupled lattice, it may happen at some places in the lattice that mode1 is associated with y-plane, and mode2 with x-plane. Switching the association of mode1 and mode2 with x and y-planes as one propagates the twiss parameters through the lattice is called "modes flip" (use **off-block diagonal** solution for $`W_{12}`$). In case the modes flip is triggered, there is an additional stability check, either the calculation of twiss parameters can be done with modes flip or not.

### Intermediate values

The `SELECT, FLAG=interpolate` command allows to select locations for output of intermediate values for the `TWISS` command. If interpolation points have been selected for an element, the `TWISS` command will add the values at these locations to the TFS table rather than at the end of the element.

> 

**Note:** This feature may behave unexpectecly with `CENTRE`.

Selected elements can optionally be filtered based on sequence, range and class. Every selection specifies exactly one of the following actions which overrides previous selections for the matching elements:

remove interpolation positions.

slice using a fixed number of slices.

slice at every `STEP` meters.

slice at given locations (as fraction of the node length).
