# `MAD-X` Modules
## Matching Module

Before a match operation at least one sequence must be selected by means of a [`USE`](#sec:use) command. Matching is initiated by the [`MATCH`](#sec:match) command. The matching module can act on more than one sequence simultaneously by specifying more than one sequence when initiating the matching mode. From this command to the corresponding [`ENDMATCH`](#sec:endmatch) command `MAD-X` accepts the matching commands listed below. For a mathematical description of the minimisation procedures see .

In particular one may do the following:

- Define the sequence(s) the matching module will work on

- Set initial conditions for transfer line matching

- Define constraints

- Define the parameters to be varied

- Match by different methods.

The matching commands are described in detail below. Some other commands can also be issued during matching.

- Enter and Leave Matching Mode

  - [`MATCH`](#sec:match): Initiate Matching Mode

  - [`ENDMATCH`](#sec:endmatch): Leave Matching Mode

- Define Variable Parameter

  - [`VARY`](#sec:vary): Set Parameter to Vary

- Define Constraint

  - [`CONSTRAINT`](#sec:constraint): Simple Constraint

  - [`CONSTRAINT`](#sec:userconstraint): User Defined Variables

  - [`WEIGHT`](#sec:weight): Matching Weights

  - [`GLOBAL`](#sec:global): Global Constraints

  - [`GWEIGHT`](#sec:gweight): Weights for Global Constraints

- [Matching Methods](#sec:match-methods)

  - [`LMDIF`](#subsec:match-lmdif): Fast Gradient Minimisation

  - [`MIGRAD`](#subsec:match-migrad): Gradient Minimisation

  - [`SIMPLEX`](#subsec:match-simplex): Simplex Minimisation

  - [`JACOBIAN`](#subsec:match-jacobian): Newton Minimisation

- Expression Matching with [`USE_MACRO`](#sec:use-macro)

### MATCH …ENDMATCH

<span id="sec:endmatch" label="sec:endmatch"></span>

The `MATCH` command is used for matching either a [periodic cell](#sec:cell) or an [insertion](#sec:insertion) to another part of the machine.

Both matching modes are initiated by the `MATCH` command using one of several forms outlined below.

The `ENDMATCH` command terminates the matching section and deletes all tables related to the matching run.

> 

### Cell Matching

The matching of a periodic cell is initiated by a `MATCH` command of the form:

> 

In this first mode the matching routine is initiated only with one attribute specifying the sequence(s) the matching module will work on. In this matching mode the periodicity of the optics functions is enforced at the beginning and end of the selected range.

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> MATCH, SEQUENCE=’name1’, ’name2’, …,’name-n’;
>
> </div>

### Insertion Matching

The matching of an insertion to another part of the machine is initiated by a `MATCH` command taking one of the following forms:

> 

or

> 

In the second mode, called insertion matching, the matching routine is initiated with two attributes: one specifying the sequence(s) the matching module will work on and one specifying the initial conditions of the optic functions for each sequence. In this case the initial values are assumed as exact.

**Specification of Initial Values:** The initial values of the optical functions for the insertion matching can either be specified in form of a [`SAVEBETA`](#sec:savebeta) command or by explicitly stating the individual optic function values after the `MATCH` command. The two options can be entered as

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> MATCH, S̄EQUENCE= ’name1’, ’name2’,.., ’name-n’,\
> BETA0= ’beta01’, ’beta02’,..., ’beta0n’;
>
> </div>

or

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> MATCH, S̄EQUENCE=’seqname’,\
> BETX=real, ALFX=real, MUX=real,\
> BETY=real, ALFY=real, MUY=real,\
> X=real, PX=real, Y=real, PY=real,\
> DX=real, DY=real, DPX=real, DPY=real,\
> DELTAP=real;
>
> </div>

**Example 1:**

    CELL: SEQUENCE=(...) ;
    INSERT: SEQUENCE=(...) ;
    USE, PERIOD=cell;
    SAVEBETA, LABEL=bini, PLACE=#e;
    TWISS, SEQUENCE=cell;
    USE, PERIOD=insert;
    MATCH, SEQUENCE=insert, BETA0=bini;
    CONSTRAINT, SEQUENCE=insert, RANGE=#e, MUX=9.345, MUY=9.876;

This matches the sequence ’INSERT’ with initial conditions to a new phase advance. The initial conditions are given by the periodic solution for the sequence CELL1.

**Example 2:**

    USE, PERIOD=insert;
    MATCH, SEQUENCE=insert;
    CONSTRAINT, SEQUENCE=insert, RANGE=#e, MUX=9.345, MUY=9.876;

This matches the beam line ’INSERT’ with periodic boundary conditions to a new phase advance.

The initial conditions can also be transmitted by a combination of a [`SAVEBETA`](#sec:savebeta) command and explicit optic function specifications:

    USE, cell1;
    SAVEBETA, LABEL=bini, PLACE=#E;
    TWISS, SEQUENCE=cell1;
    USE, PERIOD=line1;
    MATCH, SEQUENCE=line1, BETA0=bini, MUX=1.234, MUY=4.567;

This example transmits all values of the `SAVEBETA` array ’bini’ as initial values to the `MATCH` command and overrides the initial phase values by the given values.

An additional [`CONSTRAINT`](#sec:constraint) may be imposed in other places, i.e. intermediate or end values of the optics functions at the transition point.

### More than one active sequence

The matching module can act on more than one sequence simultaneously by specifying more than one sequence after the `MATCH` command:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> MATCH, SEQUENCE=line1, CELL1, BETA0=bini1, bini2;
>
> </div>

This example initiates the matching mode for the ’LINE1’ and the ’CELL1’ sequence. The [Twiss](#chap:twiss) functions of the two sequences are calculated with fixed initial conditions.

The `SAVEBETA` array ’bini1’ is used for calculating the optics functions of sequence ’LINE1’ and the `SAVEBETA` array ’bini2’ for calculating the optics functions of sequence ’CELL1’. Without the initial conditions the matching module will work in the [`CELL`](#sec:cell) mode.

### SLOW attribute

The `SLOW` logical flag enforces the old and slow matching procedure which allows to use the special columns `mvar1, ..., mvar4`, if they are added to the twiss table.

Recently a number of parameter, like `RE56`, have been added to the list of parameters that can be matched.

Nevertheless, some parameters might only be available when using the `SLOW` attribute.

### Useful TWISS attributes

Some of the attributes of the [`TWISS`](#chap:twiss) command can be used in the `MATCH` command and are transmitted to the `TWISS` command when it is internally invoked during the matching process.

The main `TWISS` attributes that can be used also in the `MATCH` command are:

If this flag is used the one-turn map at the location of every element is calculated and prepared for storage in the TWISS table.

Target values for the matrix elements at certain positions in the sequence can be specified with the help of the [`CONSTRAINT`](#sec:constraint) command and the keywords:\
**RE, RE11...RE16...RE61...RE66**, where **REij** refers to the "ij" matrix component.

This logical flag sets the matching process to transmit the `CHROM` attribute to the [`TWISS`](#chap:twiss) command when it is invoked, enforcing the calculation of chromatic functions and synchrotron radiation integrals, and the alternative calculation of chromaticities as documented in [`TWISS`](#chap:twiss).

If this flag is used the chromatic functions at the location of every element are calculated and prepared for storage in the TWISS table.

Target values for the chromatic functions at certain positions in the sequence can be specified with the help of the [`CONSTRAINT`](#sec:constraint) command and the repective keywords [`WX, PHIX, WY, PHIY,...`](#subsec:tables-chrom) for the chromatic functions.

**Examples:**

    MATCH, RMATRIX, SEQUENCE='name', BETA0='beta-block-name';
    CONSTRAINT, SEQUENCE=insert, RANGE=#e, RE11=-2.808, RE22=2.748;
    VARY, NAME=kqf, STEP=1.0e-6;
    VARY, NAME=kqd, STEP=1.0e-6;

This matches the sequence ’name’ with initial conditions to new values for the matrix elements `RE11` and `RE22` by varying the strength of the main quadrupole circuits.

### VARY

A parameter to be varied is specified by the command

> 

It has six attributes:

The name of the parameter or attribute to be varied,

The approximate initial step size for varying the parameter. If the step is not entered, `MAD-X` tries to find a reasonable step, but this may not always work.

Lower limit for the parameter (optional),

Upper limit for the parameter (optional).

allowed change rate (optional, available only using [JACOBIAN](#subsec:match-jacobian) routine). Limit the parameter to increase (`SLOPE=1`) or decrease (`SLOPE=-1`) only.

optimal value for the parameter (optional, available only using [JACOBIAN](#subsec:match-jacobian) routine).

**Examples:**

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx̄ VARY, NAME=PAR1, STEP=1.0E-4; ! vary global parameter PAR1\
> VARY, NAME=QL11-\>K1, STEP=1.0E-6; ! vary attribute K1 of the QL11\
> VARY, NAME=Q15-\>K1, STEP=0.0001, LOWER=0.0, UPPER=0.08; ! vary with limits
>
> </div>

If the upper limit is smaller than the lower limit, the two limits are interchanged. If the current value is outside the range defined by the limits, it is brought back to range.

If a parameter comes outside the limits during the matching process the matching module resets the parameter to a value inside the limits and informs the user with a message. If such a ’rescaling’ occurs more than 20 times the matching process terminates. The user should either eliminate the corresponding parameters from the list of varied parameters or change the corresponding upper and lower limits before restarting the matching process.

After a matching operation all varied attributes retain their value after the last successful matching iteration. Using [JACOBIAN](#subsec:match-jacobian) routine, `STRATEGY=3`, in case the number of parameters is greater than the number of constraint, if a parameter comes outside the limits, it is excluded automatically from the set of variables and a new solution is searched.

### CONSTRAINT

Simple constraints are imposed by the `CONSTRAINT` command. The `CONSTRAINT` command has three attributes:

- the `SEQUENCE` entry specifies the sequence for which the constraint applies.

- the RANGE entry specifies the position where the constraint must be satisfied. The `RANGE` can either be the name of a single element in the sequence or a range between two elements. In the later case the two element names must be separated by a ’/’: `RANGE=name1/name2`

- the optics functions to be constrained.

The optic functions can be constrained in four different ways:

1.  lower limit: `BETX `$`>`$` value`

2.  upper limit: `BETX `$`<`$` value`

3.  lower and upper limits: `BETX `$`<`$` value1, BETX `$`>`$` value2`

4.  target value: `BETX=value`

In case one element is affected by more than one constraint command the last CONSTRAINT will be chosen. For example, one can specify the maximum acceptable beta function over a range of the sequence and specify the target beta function for one element that lies inside this range. In this case one must first specify the constraint that affects the whole range and then the constraint for the single element. This way the constraint of the target value overrides the previous constraint on the upper limit for the selected element.

For example, the following constraint statements limit the maximum horizontal beta function between ’marker1’ and ’marker2’ to 200 meter and require a horizontal beta function of 100 meter at element ’name1’:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> CONSTRAINT, SEQUENCE=seqname, RANGE=’marker1’/’marker2’, BETX\<200.0;\
> CONSTRAINT, SEQUENCE=seqname, RANGE=’name1’/’marker2’, BETX=100.0;
>
> </div>

When the two constraint statements are interchanged, and supposing that name1 is an element in the range marker1/marker2, the horizontal beta function at element ’name1’ will only be limited to less than 200 meter and NOT constrained to 100 meter!

The CONSTRAINTS can either be specified with explicit values for the constraints of the optic functions or via a pre-calculated [`SAVEBETA`](#sec:savebeta) module. The first options has the form:

> 

Here all [linear lattice functions](#subsec:tables-linear) (BETX, BETY, ALFX, ALFY, MUX, MUY, DX, DY, DPX, DPY) or [chromatic lattice functions](#subsec:tables-chrom) (WX, XY, PHIX, PHIY, DMUX, DUMY, DDX, DDY, DDPX, DDPY) are constrained at the selected range to the corresponding values.

The second form of the CONSTRAINT command has the form

> 

Here all of (`BETX, BETY, ALFX, ALFY, MUX, MUY, DX, DY, DPX, DPY`) are constrained in the selected points to the corresponding values of a pre-calculated [`SAVEBETA`](#sec:savebeta) module. In the above example the phases (`MUX, MUY`) are overridden by the numerical values specified via `MUX=real` and `MUY=real`. Normally [`RANGE`](#sec:range) refers to a single position.

### User Defined Matching Constraints

In addition to the nominal [`TWISS`](#chap:twiss) variables, the user can define a limited set of ’user-defined’ variables in the constraint statement. This allows, for example, the matching of the normalized dispersion or the mechanical aperture. The `MATCH` module allows four user defined variables called: `MVAR1, MVAR2, MVAR3` and `MVAR4`. The variables can be defined according to the general variable declaration rules of [deferred expressions](#sec:defer). For example, in order to match the normalized dispersion at a certain location in the sequence one would first define a variable:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> MVAR1 := table(twiss,dx)/sqrt(table(twiss,betx));
>
> </div>

After that the user has to select the variable for output in the TWISS statement (see details in the [TWISS module](#chap:twiss) and [SELECT](#sec:select) statement):

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> SELECT, FLAG=twiss, CLEAR;\
> SELECT, FLAG=twiss, COLUMN=keyword, name, s, betx, dx, mvar1;\
> TWISS, SEQUENCE=seqname, FILE=twissfile;
>
> </div>

The variable can now be referenced like any other `TWISS` variable in the constraint command:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> CONSTRAINT, SEQUENCE=seqname, RANGE=range, MVAR1=targetvalue;
>
> </div>

### GLOBAL

In addition to conventional matching constraints that specify the optics functions at a certain position in the sequence the user can also constrain global optics parameters such as, for example, the overall machine tune and the machine chromaticity. Such global optics parameters can be constraint via the `GLOBAL` command, having the following syntax:

> 

All attributes are optional and have the following meaning:

the name of the sequence on which to operate the matching.

enable a correction of tunes in presence of magnetic imperfections or misalignments

enable a correction of chromaticities in presence of magnetic imperfections or misalignments

### WEIGHT, GWEIGHT

<span id="sec:gweight" label="sec:gweight"></span>

The matching procedures try to fulfil the constraints in a least square sense. A penalty function is constructed which is the sum of the squares of all errors, each multiplied by the specified weight. The larger the weight, the more important a constraint becomes. The weights are taken from a table of current values. These are initially set to default values listed in the table below, and may be reset at any time to different values. Values set in this way remain valid until changed again.

The `WEIGHT` command changes the weights for subsequent constraints:

> 

The weights are entered with the same name as the [linear lattice functions](#subsec:tables-linear) and [orbit coordinate](#subsec:tables-canon) to which the weight applies. Frequently the matching weights serve to select a restricted set of functions to be matched.

Matching weights for global matching constraints can be set by the `GWEIGHT` command, having attributes identical to those of `GLOBAL`.

> 

Default values for matching weights are given in the table below.

| NAME    | WEIGHT | NAME | WEIGHT | NAME | WEIGHT |
|:--------|-------:|:-----|-------:|:-----|-------:|
| BETX    |    1.0 | ALFX |   10.0 | MUX  |   10.0 |
| BETY    |    1.0 | ALFY |   10.0 | MUY  |   10.0 |
| X       |   10.0 | PX   |  100.0 |      |        |
| Y       |   10.0 | PY   |  100.0 |      |        |
| T       |   10.0 | PT   |  100.0 |      |        |
| DX      |   10.0 | DPX  |  100.0 |      |        |
| DY      |   10.0 | DPY  |  100.0 |      |        |
| WX      |    1.0 | PHIX |    1.0 | DMUX |    1.0 |
| WY      |    1.0 | PHIY |    1.0 | DMUY |    1.0 |
| DDX     |    1.0 | DDPX |    1.0 |      |        |
| DDY     |    1.0 | DDPY |    1.0 |      |        |
| MVAR*i* |   10.0 |      |        |      |        |
| Q1      |   10.0 | DQ1  |    1.0 |      |        |
| Q2      |   10.0 | DQ2  |    1.0 |      |        |

Default Matching Weights

### Matching Methods

`MAD-X` currently supports four different matching algorithms each associated to a command with its own attributes.

#### LMDIF: Fast Gradient Minimisation

The `LMDIF` command minimises the sum of squares of the constraint functions using their numerical derivatives. It is the fastest minimisation method available in `MAD-X`.

> 

The command has two attributes:

The maximum number of calls to the penalty function. (Default: 1000)

The desired tolerance for the minimum. (Default: 1E-6)

#### MIGRAD: Gradient Minimisation

The `MIGRAD` command minimises the penalty function using the numerical derivatives of the sum of squares.

> 

The command has three attributes:

the maximum number of calls to the penalty function. (Default: 1000)

the desired tolerance for the minimum. (Default: 1E-6)

specifies the strategy to be used. (Default: 1)\
Details are given in .

#### SIMPLEX: Simplex Minimisation

The `SIMPLEX` command minimises the penalty function by the simplex method. Details are given in .

> 

The command has two attributes:

The maximum number of calls to the penalty function. (Default: 1000)

The desired tolerance for the minimum. (Default: 1E-6)

#### JACOBIAN: Newton Minimisation

The `JACOBIAN` command minimises the penalty function calculating the Jacobian and solving the linear problem. A $`Q R`$ or $`L Q`$ decomposition is performed when the system is over or under-determined. Before starting the matching routine two optional transformations (`COOL` and `RANDOM`) are performed.

> 

The command has the folowing attributes:

The maximum number of calls to the penalty function. (Default: 30)

The desired tolerance for the minimum. (Default: 1E-6)

The number of calls of the JACOBIAN routine. (Default: 1)

Selects the maximum number of iteration used to determine the step length which reduces the penalty function during the main iteration. A large number (i.e. 6) reduces the probability to diverge from the solution, but increases the probability of being trapped in a local minimum.

A code for the strategy to be used. (Default: 3)\
If STRATEGY=1 the routine resets the values of the variables which exceeds the limits. If STRATEGY=2 the routine print the Jacobian and exit without matching. If STRATEGY=3 the routine disables the variables which exceeds the limits keeping however the number of variables greater or equal to the number of the constraints.

The factors which specify the following transformation:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> xxxx̄xxxxxxxx̄ if "balance" \>=0\
> newval = (1-cool)\*oldval + &\
> cool\*((1-balance)\*maxval + balance\*minval)\
> else\
> newval = (1-cool)\*oldval + cool\*optval
>
> </div>

where `newval` is the new value after the transformation, `oldval` is the previous value, `maxval, minval, optval` are the maximum, minimum and optimal value of the variable specified in the `VARY` command.

The factors which specify the following transformation:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> newval = ( 1 + random \* rand() ) \* oldval
>
> </div>

where `newval` is the new value after the transformation, `oldval` is the previous value, `rand()` is a stochastic variable with a uniform (-0.5,0.5) distribution.

### USE_MACRO

It is possible to match user defined expressions with the `USE_MACRO` keyword.

The general input structure for a `MATCH` command is the following:

    MATCH,USE_MACRO;
    ... VARY statements ...
    USE_MACRO, NAME=macro1;
         or
    macro1: MACRO={ ... madx statements};
    CONSTRAINT, expr=  "lhs1 < | = | > rhs1";
    CONSTRAINT, weight=2, expr=  "lhs2 < | = | > rhs2";
    ...  CONSTRAINT statements ...
    MACRO 2 definition
    ... CONSTRAINT statements ...
    MACRO n definition
    ... CONSTRAINT statements ...
    ... METHODS statements ...
    ENDMATCH;

The algorithm for evaluating the penalty function is the following:

- execute the first macro,

- evaluate and compute the difference between the left hand side (lhs) and the right hand side (rhs) of the first set of expressions,

- in case of other macros, evaluates in order the macro and the expressions

- the set of differences are minimized by the selected method using the variables defined in the VARY statements.

#### Initiating the Matching Module with `USE_MACRO`

With:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> MATCH, USE_MACRO;
>
> </div>

the `MATCH` command can be used for matching any expression which can be defined through expression. It requires a slightly different syntax.

#### VARY statements

In the `USE_MACRO` mode the `VARY` statement follows the same rules of the other modes explained in the section [Define Variable Parameter](#sec:vary)

#### Macro definitions

The macro to be used in the matching routine can be defined in two ways:

- using USE_MACRO statement:

  > <div class="tabbing">
  >
  > USE_MACRO, NAME=macro1;
  >
  > </div>

  defining a new macro on the fly using the usual syntax for [`MACRO`](#sec:macro)s.

After a macro definition a set of constraints should be defined, with the following syntax for the `CONSTRAINT` command:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> CONSTRAINT, expr = "lhs = rhs";\
> CONSTRAINT, expr = "lhs \< rhs";\
> CONSTRAINT, expr = "lhs \> rhs";
>
> </div>

where "lhs" and "rhs" are well defined `MAD-X` expressions. Another set of macro and constraints can be defined afterwards.

#### Examples

The `USE_MACRO` mode can emulate a matching script which uses the normal syntax.

Normal syntax:

    MATCH,SEQUENCE=LHCB1,LHCB2;
        VARY, NAME=KSF.B1, STEP=0.00001;
        VARY, NAME=KSD.B1, STEP=0.00001;
        VARY, NAME=KSF.B2, STEP=0.00001;
        VARY, NAME=KSD.B2, STEP=0.00001;
        GLOBAL,SEQUENCE=LHCB1,DQ1=QPRIME;
        GLOBAL,SEQUENCE=LHCB1,DQ2=QPRIME;
        GLOBAL,SEQUENCE=LHCB2,DQ1=QPRIME;
        GLOBAL,SEQUENCE=LHCB2,DQ2=QPRIME;
        LMDIF, CALLS=10, TOLERANCE=1.0E-21;
    ENDMATCH;

USE_MACRO syntax:

    MATCH,USE_MACRO;
        VARY, NAME=KSF.B1, STEP=0.00001;
        VARY, NAME=KSD.B1, STEP=0.00001;
        VARY, NAME=KSF.B2, STEP=0.00001;
        VARY, NAME=KSD.B2, STEP=0.00001;
        M1: MACRO={ TWISS,SEQUENCE=LHCB1; };
        CONSTRAINT, EXPR= TABLE(SUMM,DQ1)=QPRIME;
        CONSTRAINT, EXPR= TABLE(SUMM,DQ2)=QPRIME;
        M2: MACRO={ TWISS,SEQUENCE=LHCB2; };
        CONSTRAINT, EXPR= TABLE(SUMM,DQ1)=QPRIME;
        CONSTRAINT, EXPR= TABLE(SUMM,DQ2)=QPRIME;
        LMDIF, CALLS=10, TOLERANCE=1.0E-21;
    ENDMATCH;

### Matching Examples

All matching examples and the related files for executing the `MAD-X` sample jobs can be found in the examples directory (<https://github.com/MethodicalAcceleratorDesign/madx-examples>) of the `MAD-X` website.

- Simple Periodic Cell\
  Match a simple cell to given phase advances: [FIVE-CELL](https://github.com/MethodicalAcceleratorDesign/madx-examples/blob/master/match/5cell/job.5cell.madx)

- Simple Periodic Cell\
  Match the matrix elements of the linear transfer matrix at the end of a sequence 5 periodic cells: [RMATRIX](https://github.com/MethodicalAcceleratorDesign/madx-examples/blob/master/match/r-matrix/job.r-matrix.madx)

- Transfer line with initial conditions\
  Match a sequence of 5 periodic cells with initial conditions to given beta-functions at the end of the sequence: [Transfer line](https://github.com/MethodicalAcceleratorDesign/madx-examples/blob/master/match/line/job.line.madx)

- Global tune matching in a sequence of 5 periodic cells\
  Match the global tune of a sequence of 5 periodic cells: [Global tune](https://github.com/MethodicalAcceleratorDesign/madx-examples/blob/master/match/global-tune/job.global-tune.madx)

- Global tune matching for the LHC\
  Match the global tune for beam1 of the LHC: [Global tune for the LHC](https://github.com/MethodicalAcceleratorDesign/madx-examples/blob/master/match/lhc.tune/job.lhc.tune.madx)

- Global chromaticity matching for the LHC\
  Match the global chromaticity for beam1 of the LHC: [Global chromaticity for the LHC](https://github.com/MethodicalAcceleratorDesign/madx-examples/blob/master/match/lhc.chromaticity/job.lhc.chromaticity.madx)

- Global chromaticity matching for both beams of the LHC\
  Match the global chromaticity for beam1 and beam2 of the LHC: [Global chromaticity for both beams of the LHC](https://github.com/MethodicalAcceleratorDesign/madx-examples/blob/master/match/lhc.2chromaticity/job.lhc.2chromaticity.madx)

- IR8 insertion matching for beam1 of the LHC\
  Match the insertion IR8 with initial conditions to given values of the optics functions at the IP and the end of the insertion: [IR8 insertion matching](https://github.com/MethodicalAcceleratorDesign/madx-examples/blob/master/match/lhc.insertion/job.lhc.insertion.madx) for beam1 of the LHC

- IR8 insertion matching for beam1 of the LHC with upper limits on the optics functions\
  Match the insertion IR8 with initial conditions to given values of the optics functions at the IP and the end of the insertion while limiting the maximum acceptable beta functions over the whole insertion: [IR8 insertion matching](https://github.com/MethodicalAcceleratorDesign/madx-examples/blob/master/match/lhc.insertion-upper/job.lhc.insertion-upper.madx) for beam1 of the LHC with upper limits for all beta functions inside the insertion

- Simultaneous orbit matching at IP8 for beam1 and beam2 of the LHC\
  Match simultaneously the orbit of beam1 and beam of the LHC at IP8 with initial conditions to the same given values at the IP: [Orbit matching at IP8](https://github.com/MethodicalAcceleratorDesign/madx-examples/blob/master/match/lhc.iporbit/job.lhc.iporbit.madx) for beam1 and beam2 of the LHC

- IR8 beta squeeze for beam1 using JACOBIAN matching routine\
  Try to find a beta squeeze for IR8 starting from 10 meters. [Beta squeeze for IR8](https://github.com/MethodicalAcceleratorDesign/madx-examples/blob/master/match/lhcV65.ir8squeeze/job.lhcV65.ir8squeeze.madx)

- Matching first and second order chromaticity of the LHC using USE_MACRO option.\
  Match simultaneously the first and second order chromaticity by defining macros which compute them using the TWISS command or PTC. [Second order chromaticity](https://github.com/MethodicalAcceleratorDesign/madx-examples/blob/master/match/lhc.qpp/job.lhc.qpp.madx)

- Matching s position using VLENGTH flag.\
  match the positions of elements and the total sequence length for a simple sample sequence. [s position matching](https://github.com/MethodicalAcceleratorDesign/madx-examples/blob/master/match/s-match/job.s-match.madx)

- Matching s position using USE_MACRO.\
  match the positions of elements and the total sequence length for a simple sample sequence using USE_MACRO. [s position matching](https://github.com/MethodicalAcceleratorDesign/madx-examples/blob/master/match/s-match-usemacro/job.s-match-usemacro.madx)
