# `MAD-X` Modules
## EMIT: Equilibrium emittances

`EMIT` calculates the equilibrium emittances:

> 

The attributes for the `EMIT` command are:

the average energy error.\
`EMIT` adjusts the RF frequencies in order to obtain this average energy error: the revolution frequency $`f_0`$ is determined for a fictitious particle with constant momentum error $`\mathtt{DELTAP} = \delta_s = \delta(E) / p_s c`$ travelling along the design orbit. The RF frequencies are then set to $`f_{RF} = h f_0`$.

The tolerance attribute is for the distinction between static and dynamic cases:\
if for the eigenvalues of the one-turn matrix, $`|`$e_val_5$`|`$ \< tol and $`|`$e_val_6$`|`$ \<tol, then the longitudinal motion is not considered, otherwise it is.\
(Default: 1.000001)

If the machine contains at least one RF cavity, and if synchrotron radiation is enabled with [`BEAM, RADIATE=true;`](#sec:beam), the `EMIT` command computes the equilibrium emittances and other electron beam parameters using the method in .

In this calculation the effects of quadrupoles, sextupoles and octupoles along the closed orbit are also considered. Thin multipoles are used only if they have a fictitious length `LRAD` different from zero.

If the machine does not contain any RF cavity, if synchrotron radiation is turned off ([`BEAM, RADIATE=false;`](#sec:beam), or if the longitudinal motion is not stable, `EMIT` only computes the parameters that are not related to radiation and does not update the `BEAM` values.

If synchrotron radiation is enabled ([`BEAM, RADIATE=true;`](#sec:beam), and the `DELTAP` attribute is zero, and the longitudinal motion is stable, `EMIT` calculates and updates the following values for the `BEAM` attached to the current sequence: both geometric and normalized transverse emittances, longitudinal emittance and beam sizes ($`\sigma_E`$ and $`\sigma_t`$), damping partition numbers, energy loss per turn and synchrotron tune.

**Example:**

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> RFC: RFCAVITY, HARMON..., VOLT=...;\
> …\
> BEAM, ENERGY = 100.0, RADIATE=true;\
> EMIT, DELTAP = 0.01;
>
> </div>

**Remark:**\
This module assumes nearly constant lattice functions inside elements. This assumption works for many machines, like LEP but it fails when the lattice functions largely vary inside single elements. In the later case it is advised to slice the elements.
