# `MAD-X` Modules
## Slicing a sequence into thin lenses

This module takes a sequence with thick elements and creates another one with similar functionality but composed of thin (zero length) element slices or simplified thick slices as required by `MAD-X` tracking or conversion to `SIXTRACK` input format.

DISCLAIMER: Several `MAD-X` commands such as `ELIGN`, `EFCOMP` won’t directly work on sequences produced by `MAKETHIN`. In order to use such commands on a thin sequence, it is advisable to save the sequence on a file, and then re-load it.

### MAKETHIN

The slicing is performed by the command:

> 

The parameters are defined as:

seqname is the name of the sequence to be processed to thin slices. The sequence must be active, i.e. it should have been previously loaded with a [`USE`](#sec:use) command. The sequence must use the default positioning of elements (`REFER=centre`).

the slicing style to be used for all active elements (excluding corrector magnets). The corrector magnets and the inactive elements are instead sliced so there is a slice in the beginning and in end of the location of the thick element.\
Available slicing styles are:

is the default slicing algorithm for all elements except collimators and is described in . `TEAPOT` is a clear improvement over the `SIMPLE` algorithm.

produces slices of equal strength and length at equidistant positions.

is the default slicing algorithm for collimators. If only one slice is chosen it is placed in the middle of the old element. If two slices are chosen they are placed at either end. Three slices or more are treated as one slice.

is the previous default algorithm that was active up to version 5.02.05 when the `STYLE` attribute was not given; the standard slicing for all elements, except collimators, is `TEAPOT` if the number of slices is less or equal to four, and `SIMPLE` otherwise.

is a logical flag to control the generation of `DIPEDGE` elements at the start and/or end of bending magnets, to conserve edge focusing from pole face angles `E1, E2` or extra fields described by `FINT, FINTX`, in the process of slicing bending magnets to thin multipole slices. Selection with `THICK=true` will translate a complex thick `RBEND` or `SBEND`, including edge effects, to a simple thick `SBEND` with edge focusing transferred to extra `DIPEDGE` elements.\
(Default: true)

Example:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> ! keep translated rbend as thick sbend\
> SELECT, FLAG=makethin, CLASS=rbend, THICK=true;
>
> </div>

### Controlling the number of slices

The number of slices can be set individually for elements or groups of elements using the `SELECT` command

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> SELECT, F̄LAG=makethin,\
> RANGE=range, CLASS=class, PATTERN=pattern\[,FULL\]\[,CLEAR\],\
> THICK=logical, SLICE=integer;
>
> </div>

where the argument to the attribute `SLICE` stands for the number of slices for the selected elements. The default is one slice and `THICK=false` for all elements, i.e. conversion of all thick elements to a single thin slice positioned at the centre of the original thick element.

Note that `THICK=true` only applies to dipole or quadrupole magnetic elements and is ignored otherwise.

`MAKETHIN` allows for thick quadrupole slicing with insertion of thin `MULTIPOLE` elements between thick slices. Positioning is done with markers between slices, here however with thick slice quadrupole piece filling the whole length.

**Examples:**

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> ! slice quadrupoles in three thick slices, insert 2 markers per quadrupole\
> SELECT, FLAG=makethin, CLASS=quadrupole, THICK=true, SLICE=3;\
> \
> ! thick slicing for quadrupoles named mqxa, insert one marker in the middle\
> SELECT, FLAG=makethin, PATTERN=mqxa$`\backslash`$., THICK=true, SLICE=2;
>
> </div>

Slicing can be turned off for certain elements or classes by specifying a number of slices $`< 1`$. Examples:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> ! turn off slicing for sextupoles\
> SELECT, FLAG=makethin, CLASS=sextupole, SLICE=0;\
> \
> ! keep elements unchanged with names starting by mbxw\
> SELECT, FLAG=makethin, PATTERN=mbxw$`\backslash`$., SLICE=0;
>
> </div>

This option allows to introduce slicing step by step and monitor the resulting changes in optics parameters.

Keep in mind however that subsequent tracking generally requires full slicing, with possible exception of dipole and quadrupole magnetic elements.

### Choice of options for dipoles

There are several options that affect the slicing of a sequence. Depending whether dipole magnets ([`RBEND` or `SBEND`](#sec:bend)) are kept as thick elements (See [`SELECT, FLAG=makethin`](#sec:select)) and whether the [`MAKEDIPEDGE`](#sec:makethin) option of `MAKETHIN` is used to generate [`DIPEDGE`](#sec:dipedge) elements around these bending magnets, the resulting sequence is more adapted to optics calculation or tracking. The following table gives an indication of the best choice of options for dipole elements

|                     | `THICK=false`          | `THICK=true`              |
|:--------------------|:-----------------------|:--------------------------|
| `MAKEDIPEDGE=false` | backward compatibility | thick optics calculations |
| `MAKEDIPEDGE=true`  | thin tracking          | thick tracking            |

Best choice of options in `MAKETHIN`

The combination of [`THICK=false`](#sec:numberofslices) (dipoles converted to thin lenses) and [`MAKEDIPEDGE=false`](#sec:makethin) (no [`DIPEDGE`](#sec:dipedge) thin elements inserted around the dipoles) results in a lattice with Twiss parameters that can differ significantly from those of the original sequence. This is most obvious with the tune or phase advance parameters that are generally differing by a significant amount (see first hint below). This combination is however useful for backward compatibility with previous versions of `MAKETHIN` before [`DIPEDGE`](#sec:dipedge) elements were implemented.

The combination of [`THICK=true`](#sec:numberofslices) (dipoles are kept as thick elements and not converted to thin lenses) and [`MAKEDIPEDGE=false`](#sec:makethin) ([`DIPEDGE`](#sec:dipedge) thin elements are not inserted around the thick dipoles to replace the edge effects that stay with the bends themselves) results in a lattice with [`TWISS`](#chap:twiss) parameters very comparable to those of the original sequence. The dipoles are still thick elements, eventually sliced, with proper edge effects up to second order, although non-symplectic. This is the best combination for optics studies without particle tracking, e.g. with [`TWISS`](#chap:twiss).

The combination of [`THICK=false`](#sec:numberofslices) for dipoles and [`MAKEDIPEDGE=true`](#sec:makethin) transforms the original dipoles into one or several thin slices without any edge effect, surrounded by a pair of [`DIPEDGE`](#sec:dipedge) elements at the original location of dipole entrance and exit. Note however that these [`DIPEDGE`](#sec:dipedge) elements only contain first order effects for the purpose of tracking.

The combination of [`THICK=true`](#sec:numberofslices) for dipoles and [`MAKEDIPEDGE=true`](#sec:makethin) conserves the dipoles as thick element dipole bodies only while their associated edge effects are transferred to [`DIPEDGE`](#sec:dipedge) elements that are taken into account at first order only for symplectic tracking.

### Additional information

The generated thin lens sequence has the following properties:

- The new sequence has the same name as the original. The original sequence is replaced by the new one in memory. If the original sequence is needed for further processing in `MAD-X`, it should be reloaded.

- The algorithm also processes any sub-sequence inserted in the main sequence. These sub-sequences are also given the same names as the original ones.

- Any element transformed into a single thin lens element has the same name as the original.

- If an element is sliced into more than one **thin** slices, the individual slices have the same basename as the original element plus a suffix `..1`, `..2`, etc. and a marker with the name of the original element is placed at the location of the center of the original element.

- If an element is sliced into more than one **thick** slices, the individual slices have the same basename as the original element plus a suffix `_EN` the first one, a suffix `_EX` the last one, and a suffix `_BO` the ones in between.

**Hints**

1.  Compare the main optics parameters like tunes before and after slicing with `MAKETHIN`. Rematch tunes and chromaticity as necessary after `MAKETHIN`.

2.  In tests, turn off slicing for some of the main element classes to identify the main sources of changes.

3.  For sextupoles and octupoles, a single slice should always be sufficient.

4.  Increase the number of slices for critical elements like mini-beta quadrupoles. Even there, more than four slices should rarely be required.

5.  In case of problems or doubts, consider to `FLATTEN` the sequence before slicing.

6.  See the [examples](http://madx.web.cern.ch/madx/madX/examples/makethin/) for makethin.\
    See also the presentations on the upgrade of the makethin module:\
    [LCU_makethin_2012_09_18.pdf](http://ab-dep-abp.web.cern.ch/ab-dep-abp/LCU/LCU_meetings/2012/20120918/LCU_makethin_2012_09_18.pdf), and\
    [LCU_makethin_2013_04_19.pdf](http://ab-dep-abp.web.cern.ch/ab-dep-abp/LCU/LCU_meetings/2013/20130419/LCU_makethin_2013_04_19.pdf).\
    TEAPOT is documented in [IPAC’13 MOPWO027](http://accelconf.web.cern.ch/AccelConf/IPAC2013/papers/mopwo027.pdf)
