# `MAD-X` Modules
## Error Definitions

This chapter describes the commands which provide error assignment and output of errors assigned to elements. It is possible to assign alignment errors and field errors to single beam elements or to ranges or classes of beam elements.

Elements, classes or ranges of elements are selected by the [`SELECT`](#sec:select) command.

ATTENTION: since errors can only be assigned to machine elements, it is necessary to [`FLATTEN`](#sec:flatten) a sequence if it includes other sequences.

Errors can be specified with both constant or random values.

Error definitions consist of four types of statements listed below. They may be entered after having selected a beam line by means of a [`USE`](#sec:use) command.

WARNING: any further [`USE`](#sec:use) command will destroy the assigned errors. Use the [`ESAVE`](#sec:esave) option to save and reload errors.

WARNING: if errors are to be applied to a thin sequence produced by [`MAKETHIN`](#chap:makethin), it is advisable to save the sequence on a file and then reload it, in order for `MAD-X` to reinitialize its data structures in a suitable way.

### EALIGN: Alignment Errors

Alignment errors are defined by the `EALIGN` command. The misalignments refer to the [local reference system](#sec:reference) for a perfectly aligned machine. Misalignments are defined as displacements along the three coordinate axes, and rotations about the coordinate axes. Alignment errors can be assigned to all beam elements except drift spaces. The effect of misalignments is treated in a linear approximation.

[Beam Position Monitors](#sec:monitor) can be given readout errors as well as readout scaling errors in both horizontal and vertical planes. Monitor readout and scaling errors are ignored for all elements other than [monitors](#sec:monitor).

Each new `EALIGN` statement replaces the misalignment errors for all elements in its range, unless the logical `ADD` attribute of [`EOPTION`](#sec:eoption) has been specified.

Alignment errors are defined by the statement

> 

for elements selected by the [`SELECT`](#sec:select) command.

<figure id="F-XSDISP" data-latex-placement="ht">
<embed src="figures/f-xsdisp.pdf" />
<figcaption>Alignment errors in the <span class="math inline">(<em>x</em>, <em>s</em>)</span>-plane</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure id="F-XYDISP" data-latex-placement="htb">
<embed src="figures/f-xydisp.pdf" />
<figcaption>Alignment errors in the <span class="math inline">(<em>x</em>, <em>y</em>)</span>-plane</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure id="F-YSDISP" data-latex-placement="ht">
<embed src="figures/f-ysdisp.pdf" />
<figcaption>Alignment errors in the <span class="math inline">(<em>y</em>, <em>s</em>)</span>-plane</figcaption>
</figure>

The attributes are:

The misalignment in the *x*-direction for the entry of the beam element. (Default: 0 m).\
`DX`$`>`$<!-- -->0 displaces the element in the positive *x*-direction

The misalignment in the *y*-direction for the entry of the beam element. (Default: 0 m).\
`DY`$`>`$<!-- -->0 displaces the element in the positive *y*-direction

The misalignment in the *s*-direction for the entry of the beam element. (Default: 0 m).\
`DS`$`>`$<!-- -->0 displaces the element in the positive *s*-direction

The rotation around the *x*-axis. (Default: 0 rad).\
A positive angle gives a greater *y*-coordinate for the exit than for the entry.

The rotation around the *y*-axis according to the right hand rule. (Default: 0 rad).

The rotation around the *s*-axis according to the right hand rule. (Default: 0 rad).

The horizontal read error for a monitor. This is ignored if the element is not a monitor.\
If `MREX`$`>`$<!-- -->0 the reading for *x* is too high (default: 0 m).

The vertical read error for a monitor. This is ignored if the element is not a monitor.\
If `MREY`$`>`$<!-- -->0, the reading for *y* is too high (default: 0 m).

The relative horizontal scaling error for a monitor. This is ignored if the element is not a monitor.\
If `MSCALX`$`>`$<!-- -->0 the reading for *x* is too high (default: 0). A value of 0.5 implies that the actual reading is multiplied by 1.5.

The relative vertical scaling error for a monitor. This is ignored if the element is not a monitor.\
If `MSCALY`$`>`$<!-- -->0 the reading for *y* is too high (default: 0). A value of -0.3 implies that the actual reading is multiplied by 0.7.

The misalignment in the *x*-direction for the entry of an aperture limit (default: 0 m).\
`AREX`$`>`$<!-- -->0 displaces the element in the positive *x*-direction

The misalignment in the *y*-direction for the entry of an aperture limit (default: 0 m).\
`AREY`$`>`$<!-- -->0 displaces the element in the positive *y*-direction

<figure id="F-ERMONI" data-latex-placement="htb">
<embed src="figures/f-ermoni.pdf" />
<figcaption>Readout errors in a monitor</figcaption>
</figure>

**Examples:**

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> SELECT, FLAG = ERROR, CLASS = MQ;\
> EALIGN, DX = 0.002, DY = 0.0004\*RANF(), DPHI = 0.0002\*GAUSS();
>
> </div>

Assigns alignment errors to all elements of class `MQ`.

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> SELECT, FLAG = ERROR, PATTERN = "QF.\*";\
> EALIGN, DX = 0.001\*TGAUSS(2.5), DY = 0.0001\*RANF();
>
> </div>

Assigns alignment errors to all elements starting with `"QF"`. ` TGAUSS(2.5)` specifies a Gaussian distribution cut at 2.5 sigma.

### EFCOMP: Field Errors

Field errors can be entered as relative or absolute errors. Different multipole components can be specified with different kinds of errors (relative or absolute). Relations between absolute and relative field errors are listed below.

In `MAD-8` two commands were used for that purpose: `EFIELD` and `EFCOMP`. Only `EFCOMP` was implemented in `MAD-X` since it provides the full functionality of `EFIELD` and there was no need for duplication.

All field errors are specified as the integrated value $`\int K ds`$ of the [field components](#sec:sign-convention) along the magnet axis in $`m^{-i}`$. There is no provision to specify a global relative excitation error affecting all field components in a combined function magnet. Such an error may only be entered by defining the same relative error for all field components.

Field errors can be specified for all magnetic elements by the statement

> 

for elements selected by the [`SELECT`](#sec:select) command.

Each new `EFCOMP` statement replaces the field errors for all elements in its range(s). Previous field errors present in the range are discarded or incremented depending on the setting of `ADD` logical attribute of the [`EOPTION`](#sec:eoption) command. `EFCOMP` defines the field errors in terms of relative or absolute components.

The attributes are:

If relative errors are entered for multipoles, this defines the order of the base component to which the relative errors refer. This reference strength $`k_{ref}`$ always refers to the normal component. In order to use a skew component as the reference, the reference radius should be specified as a negative number. (Default: 0)\
Please note that this implies to specify $`k_0`$ to assign relative field errors to a bending magnet since $`k_0`$ is used for the normalization and NOT the ANGLE.

radius *R* where dknr(i) or dksr(i) are specified for 0...i...20 (default 1 m). This attribute is required if dknr(i) or dksr(i) are specified. If *R* is negative, the skew component is used for the reference strength.

Absolute error for the normal multipole strength with (2i+2) poles. (Default: 0 m$`^{-i}`$).

Absolute error for the skewed multipole strength with (2i+2) poles. (Default: 0 m$`^{-i}`$).

Relative error for the normal multipole strength with (2i+2) poles. (Default: 0). The absolute error is computed from `DKNR(i)` using the following formula
``` math
\Delta K_{i}=\texttt{DKNR(i)}\cdot\left(k_{ref}\right)\cdot R^{n-j}\cdot\frac{j!}{n!}
```
where $`n`$ is the order of the reference strength, $`k_{ref}`$, specified in `ORDER`, and $`R`$ is the `RADIUS`.

Relative error for the skewed multipole strength with (2i+2) poles. (Default: 0). The absolute error is computed from `DKSR(i)` using the following formula
``` math
\Delta K_{i}=\texttt{DKSR(i)}\cdot\left(k_{ref}\right)\cdot |R|^{n-j}\cdot\frac{j!}{n!}
```
where $`n`$ is the order of the reference strength, $`k_{ref}`$, specified in `ORDER`, and $`R`$ is the `RADIUS`.

Please note that even though that any order of field errors can be specified for all elements, only those which are defined for an element will be taken into account. Only `K0` and `K1` are be considered for [`BEND`](#sec:bend) transfer map, and, in addition, `K2` and `K1S` for radiation effect. Only `K1` and `K1S` are considered for [`QUADRUPOLE`](#sec:quadrupole); `K2` and `K2S` - for [`SEXTUPOLE`](#sec:sextupole). Only [`THIN MULTIPOLE`](#sec:multipole) considers the erros of all orders.

**Time memory effects:**

The relative errors can be corrected for possible time memory effects. A correction term is computed and added to the relative error.

The correction term is parametrized as a 3rd order polynomial in the reference strength $`k_{ref}`$ according to: = (c_i \* k^i\_ref) i = 0...3 The coefficients $`c_i`$ for the polynomial must be supplied in the command.

Two additional parameters and options are required:

if it is set to 1 applies the correction term derived from the reference strength and the coefficients.

normal and skew coefficients for the computation of the correction term. The four coefficients are specified in increasing order, starting with the 0th order. Each group of four coefficients is valid for one order of the field errors. Trailing zeros can be omitted, preceding zeros must be given.

**Examples:**

Example to assign relative errors to quadrupoles:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> xxxxxxxxx̄xxxxxx̄ SELECT, FLAG=error, PATTERN="q.\*";\
> EFCOMP, ORDER=1, RADIUS=0.010,\
> DKNR={, 4e-1, 1e-1, 2e-3, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0,\
> , 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0},\
> DKSR={, 4e-1, 1e-1, 2e-3, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0,\
> , 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0};
>
> </div>

Example to add time memory effect to relative errors:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> xxxxxxxxx̄xxxxxx̄ SELECT, FLAG=error, PATTER="q̂.\*"; \[FIXME\]\
> EFCOMP, ORDER=1, RADIUS=0.020, HYSTER=1,\
> DKNR={, 1e-2, 2e-4, 4e-5, 1.e-5, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0,\
> , 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0},\
> DKSR={, 1e-2, 2e-4, 4e-5, 1.e-5, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0,\
> , 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0},\
> xxxxxxxxx̄xxxxxxxxx̄xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx̄ HCOEFFN={, 0.000, 0.000, 0.000, ! coeff. mult. order 0\
> , 0.000, 0.000, 0.000, ! coeff. mult. order 1\
> , 0.000, 0.002, 0.000};! coeff. mult. order 2
>
> </div>

See also: [random values](#subsubsec:random) and [deferred expressions](#sec:defer).

### EOPTION: Set Options for Error Definition

The error option command specifies different seeds for random values:

> 

Selects a particular sequence of random values. A `SEED` value is an integer in the range \[0...999999999\] (default: 123456789). Note that the seed set with this command is shared with the [`TRACK`](#sec:track) and [`COPTION`](#sec:coption) commands. See also: [Random Values](#subsubsec:random).

If this logical flag is set, an `EALIGN` or `EFCOMP` causes the errors to be added on top of existing ones. If it is not set, new errors overwrite any previous definitions. The default value is TRUE if it is omitted in the `EOPTION` command. The default value is false if no `EOPTION` command is used.\
Please note a recent modification: the default value for the ADD option is only applied as long as the ADD option has not been set explicitly.\
Once it was set with `EOPTION`, it is NOT reset to the default when the `ADD` option is omitted in subsequent calls to `EOPTION`.

Example:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> EOPTION, SEED = 987456321;
>
> </div>

The random number generator for `MAD-X` is taken from .

### EPRINT: List Machine Imperfections

This command prints a table of errors assigned to elements. The range for these elements has to be specified. Field errors are printed as absolute errors, because all relative errors are transformed to the corresponding absolute error at definition time. An error print is requested by the statement

> 

and elements are now selected by the [`SELECT`](#sec:select) command.

A listing for ALL elements, i.e. not only the selected, can be obtained with the command

> 

In that case, the `SELECT` command has no effect.

### ESAVE: Writing errors to a file

> 

This command saves a table of errors assigned to elements on a file, using a format which can be read in again to obtain the same results. This allows dumping the errors and reloading them after a new USE command. The range for these elements has to be specified. An error save is requested by the statement

Example:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> SELECT, FLAG=ERROR, RANGE=range, CLASS=name, PATTERN=string; ESAVE, FILE=err.file;
>
> </div>

and elements selected by the [`SELECT`](#sec:select) command are saved to the file.

To save the errors of all elements to a file, one can use:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> SELECT, FLAG = ERROR, FULL;\
> ESAVE, FILE = err.file;
>
> </div>

**Please note: in case of field errors, the absolute errors are saved and not relative errors.**

### ETABLE: Saving the errors to a table

> 

This command saves a table of errors assigned to elements on a table, using a format which can be read in again to obtain the same results. This allows storing the errors and reloading them after a new USE command.

Example:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> SELECT, FLAG=myerrortable, RANGE=range, CLASS=name, PATTERN=string;\
> ETABLE, TABLE=myerrortable;
>
> </div>

and elements selected by the [`SELECT`](#sec:select) command are stored to the table.

### SETERR: Reading errors from a table or file

To assign errors from a file is not a priori straightforward. It may be required to re-assign existing errors after a [`USE`](#sec:use) command was executed since the `USE` command deletes all errors attached to a sequence).

Errors stored in the form of an internal table (*errtab*) can be directly attached to the appropriate positions in the sequence with the command:

> 

The table *errtab* can be generated internally or from an external file (*errfile*) with the generic command `READTABLE`.

The command sequence:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> READTABLE, file=errfile, table=errtab;\
> SETERR, TABLE=errtab;
>
> </div>

reads the file *errfile* into the table *errtab* and the command `SETERR` attaches the errors to the elements in the active sequence.

The file *errfile* can be produced by a preceding `ESAVE` command or any other utility. It should follow the format of a file generated with `ESAVE` (see example program).

**Please note:**

1.  To assign correctly the errors from the file to the elements in the sequence, all elements must have individual names, otherwise an identification is not possible. Elements in the file not identified in the active sequence are ignored.

2.  Errors are assigned to ALL elements found in the file and the `FLAG=ERROR` is set. Therefore the number of elements selected corresponding to a command like\
    `SELECT, FLAG=ERROR,...;`\
    can be different after the execution of `SETERR`.
