# `MAD-X` Modules
## Orbit Correction

This chapter describes the commands to correct a closed orbit or a trajectory. The initial orbit or trajectory to be corrected can be obtained from an internal or external TFS table.

The purpose of this orbit module is to provide some basic tools to assess the performance of an orbit correction system of a machine in the design phase.

Although some interface is available, it cannot and does not provide the full functionality expected from a dedicated online orbit correction and steering program.

### CORRECT

The CORRECT statement makes a complete closed orbit or trajectory correction using the **computed** values at the monitors from the Twiss table.

The CORRECT command has the following format (some options are valid only for special algorithms):

> 

The command `CORRECT` is set up with defaults which should allow a reasonable correction for most cases with a minimum of required options (see Example 1 below).

The orbit correction must always be preceded by `TWISS` commands which generate Twiss tables. The most recent Twiss table is assumed to contain the optical parameters and the distorted orbits.

The options used in the `CORRECT` command are:

can be "ring" or "line", either a circular machine or a trajectory is corrected.\
(Default: ring)

defines the method to be used for corrections.\
Available modes are `LSQ, MICADO` and `SVD`. The first performs a least squares minimization using all available correctors. The mode `SVD` uses a Singular Value Decomposition to compute a correction using all available correctors. The latter can also be used to condition the response matrix for the modes `LSQ` or `MICADO` (using `COND=1`). It is highly recommended to precede a `LSQ` correction by a `SVD` conditioning (set `COND=1`).\
The mode `MICADO` is a "best kick" algorithm. Naive use or using it with a large number of correctors (see option `NCORR`) can get unexpected results. To avoid the creation of local bumps, it is recommended to precede a `MICADO` correction by a `SVD` conditioning (set `COND=1`).\
(Default: `MICADO`)

With `PLANE=x`, the orbit correction is performed for the horizontal plane; With `PLANE=y`, the correction is performed for the vertical plane. made. (This differs from the `MAD-8` implementation).\
(Default: X for horizontal plane)

When `COND=1`, a Singular Value Decomposition is performed and the response matrix is conditioned to avoid linearly dependent correctors. This can be used to avoid creation of artificial bumps during a `LSQ` or `MICADO` correction. Please note: this option is not robust since it depends on parameters which control the determination of singular values and redundant correctors. These can be set with the attributes `SNGVAL` and `SNGCUT`. Both parameters depend on the machine and may need adjustment. Default values are adjusted to large machines and give "reasonable" performance for smaller machines.

Defines the number of correctors to be used by the `MICADO` algorithm. If `NCORR=0` all available correctors are used. Only used by the `MICADO` algorithm.\
(Default: 0 i.e. all available correctors)

Used to set the threshold for finding singular values with the `COND` attribute. (Hint: smaller number finds fewer singular values).\
**Use with care !**\
(Default: 2.0)

Used to set the threshold for finding redundant correctors with the `COND` attribute. (Hint: larger number finds fewer redundant correctors).\
**Use with extreme care !**\
(Default: 50.0)

When `MONERROR` is 1, the `MREX` and `MREY` alignment errors on monitors assigned by [EALIGN](#sec:ealign) are taken into account, otherwise they are ignored.\
(Default: 0)

When `MONSCALE` is 1, the MSCALX and MSCALY scaling errors on monitors assigned by [EALIGN](#sec:ealign) are taken into account, otherwise they are ignored.\
(Default: 0)

takes a real number between 0.0 and 1.0. It determines the number of available monitors. If the command is given, each monitor is considered valid with a probability `MONON`. In the average a fraction $`(1.0 - \texttt{MONON})`$ of the monitors will be disabled for the correction, i.e. they are considered not existing. This allows to study the effect of missing monitors.\
(Default: 1.0 i.e. 100 %)

A limit on the maximum corrector strength can be given and a WARNING is issued if it is exceeded by one or more correctors. Please note: the strengths computed by the correction algorithms are NOT limited, only a warning is printed !\
(Default: 1.0 mrad)

When true, the correction will be done on two rings at once. The only correction mode available in this case is `MICADO`. The attribute `ORBIT=table` is ignored and `BEAM1TAB=table` and `BEAM2TAB=table` are used instead.\
(Default: false)

when this parameter is set the value is a multiplier \[TO BE COMPLETED\]\
Default unknown

an integer value to specify whether corrector settings should be all reset to zero before starting the orbit correction (`CORZERO`$`>0`$) or corrector settings calculated by the orbit correction should be added to existing corrector settings (`CORZERO`$`=0`$, Default).

specifies the maximum RMS value, in meters, of the orbit to be reached by the correction algorithm, e.g. `ERROR=1.e-3` for a 1 mm RMS target value.\
(Default: 1.e-5 m)

Normally the last active table provides the orbit to be corrected and the model for the correction. This can be overwritten by the appropriate options. Optionally, these tables can be given names like in [`TWISS, TABLE=name;`](#chap:twiss). To use these named tables, one of the following optional parameters must be used:

When this parameter is given, the orbit to be corrected is taken from a named table. The default is the last (named or unnamed) Twiss table.

When this parameter is given, the model for the correction is taken from a named Twiss table. The default is the last (named or unnamed) Twiss table.

When this parameter is given, the correction is made to a named target orbit, pre-computed with a `TWISS` command. Default is correction to the zero orbit.

(default: false): When false, the `ORBIT` and `TARGET` table are assumed to be computed by `MAD-X` with a previous `TWISS` command. When set to true, that option allows to use twiss tables imported from an external file (with the `READTABLE` command), for example to use measured BPM data. In that case, the imported twiss table is allowed to contain coordinate data only at the location of the monitors.

The name of the column that contains the name of monitors in the tables. (Default: "`name`")

The name of the column that contains the `X` position readings of monitors in the tables. (Default: "`X`")

The name of the column that contains the `Y` position readings of monitors in the tables. (Default: "`Y`")

Example of use of `CORRECT` to reproduce a measured orbit:

    ! To have a refererence optical model
    twiss, table=twiss_ref;

    ! The bpm.tsv is a reduced Twiss file containing only lines for the BPMs
    readtable, file="bpm.tsv", table="twiss_bpm";

    ! correct orbit using external measurements
    correct, flag=ring, mode=micado, ncorr=5, cond=1 ,plane=x, extern,
             model=twiss_ref, orbit=twiss_ref, target=twiss_bpm, 
             error=1.0e-21;

Two attributes affect the printing of tables and results:

the name of the file where corrector settings (in units of rad) before and after correction are printed.

the name of the file where monitor readings (in units of m) before and after correction are printed.

This command outputs the results for all monitors and all correctors in a computer readable format if its integer argument is larger than 0. The argument is added to the output. Useful to analyze runs with loops to produce large statistics.\
**ATTENTION: May produce gigantic outputs for large machines.**

If the attribute value is larger than 0, `CORRECT` prints maximum orbit and r.m.s. values for both planes, taken from the Twiss summary table, in computer readable form. This allows to analyze orbits etc. at elements that are not monitors or correctors. The argument is added to the output. This attributes is used only to produce output: no correction is made, and all other attributes are ignored.

Obsolete commands or options:

    ITERATE, ITERMAX             /* Done with loop feature in MAD commands */
    THREADER, THRTOL, WRORBIT    /* Not part of orbit correction module */
    M1LIST, M2LIST               /* Replaced by MLIST */
    C1LIST, C2LIST               /* Replaced by CLIST */
    GETORBIT, PUTORBIT           /* Replaced by generic TFS access */
    GETKICK, PUTKICK             /* Replaced by generic TFS access */

**EXAMPLES:**\
for complete MAD input files see section on examples:

Example 1: correct orbit in horizontal plane, taken from most recent Twiss table, using default algorithm (MICADO)

     CORRECT, PLANE = x; 

Example 2: no correction, only output of Twiss summary

    CORRECT, TWISSUM = 1; 

Example 3: correct orbit in horizontal plane, corrector and monitor output on table

    CORRECT, PLANE = x, MODE = lsq, CLIST = corr.out, MLIST = mon.out;   

Example 4: correct orbit in horizontal plane, use alignment and scaling errors, 15% of orbit correctors faulty

    CORRECT, PLANE = x, MONERROR = 1, MONSCALE = 1, MONON = 0.85; 

Example 5: correct orbit in horizontal plane for a two-beam machine, using MICADO with no SVD conditioning, zeroing correctors before the correction.

    CORRECT, FLAG=ring,
             TWORING, BEAM1TAB=twb1, BEAM2TAB=twb2,
             MODE=micado, COND=0, NCORR=4, ERROR=1E-6, PLANE=x,
             MLIST='mx12.tab', CLIST='cx12.tab', RESOUT=1, CORZERO=1;

### USEMONITOR, USEKICK

To provide more flexibility with orbit correction two commands are provided:

> 

The command `USEMONITOR` activates or deactivates a selection of beam position monitor. This command affects elements of types `MONITOR, HMONITOR`, and `VMONITOR`.

The command `USEKICK` activates or deactivates a selection of orbit correctors. This command affects elements of types `KICKER, HKICKER` and `VKICKER`.

Both commands have the same attributes:

If this flag is true (on), the selected elements are activated. Active orbit monitor readings will be considered, and active correctors can change their strengths in subsequent correction commands. Inactive elements will be ignored subsequently.

The sequence can be specified, otherwise the currect sequence is used for this operation.

: The usual selection commands are used to identify the elements for this operation.

Example:

    USE,...                                ! set working beam line 
    ...                                    ! define imperfections 
    USEKICK, STATUS = OFF, RANGE = ...;    ! deactivate selected correctors 
    USEMONITOR, STATUS = OFF, RANGE = ...; ! deactivate selected monitors   
    CORRECT, NCORR = 32;                   ! uses different set of correctors
    USEKICK, STATUS = OFF, RANGE = ...;    ! deactivate different set of correctors 
    CORRECT, NCORR = 32;                   ! uses different set of correctors

### CSAVE

This section is under construction, options presently only available in MADX development version.

### SETCORR

This section is under construction, options presently only available in MADX development version.

### COPTION

> 

In the orbit program monitors can be randomly disabled and the correct option command specifies different seeds for random values:

Selects a particular seed for the sequence of random values. The attribute value is an integer in the range \[0...999999999\], or an expression that evaluates to an integer in the same range (Default: 123456789). Note that the seed set with this command is shared with the [`TRACK`](#sec:track) and [`EOPTION`](#sec:eoption) commands. See also: [Random values](#subsubsec:random).

A flag taking integer values to control the printout.\
In general: the higher the value the more printout is produced. For `PRINT=0` no output is produced. The default value is 1 (Correction summary is given).

**Example:**

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> COPTION, SEED=987456321, PRINT=2;
>
> </div>

Note that the random generator for `MAD-X` is taken from .
