# `MAD-X` Modules
## SODD: Second Order Detuning and Distortion

The `SODD` command calculates the Second Order Detuning and Distortion, as described in , on the beam line defined by the last `USE` command followed by a `TWISS` command.

The `SODD` command is based on the stand-alone program with the same name, with analytical computation extended to the second order distortion.

> 

The attributes of the `SODD` command are:

flag to trigger calculation of the detuning function terms in first and second order in the strength of the multipoles. (Default: false)

flag to trigger the calculation of the distortion function and the Hamiltonian terms in first order in the strength of the multipoles. (Default: false)

flag to trigger the calculation of the distortion function and Hamiltonian terms in second order in the strength of the multipoles. (Default: false)

positions (reals in meters) along the beamline defining a longitudinal interval. (Default: 0.0,0.0)

lowest and highest multipole order to be taken in account, given as integers. (Default: 1,2)

flag to the effect that no file or internal table is created to hold the results. If true, the attributes `PRINT_ALL` or `PRINT_AT_END` have no effect. (Default: false)

flag to generate files and internal tables with results for each mutipole. (Default: false)

flag to generate files and internal tables with results at the end of the longitudinal interval. (Default: false)

flag to signal that fc.34 shall not be generated internally by invoking the conversion routine of sixtrack. The user should provide this file before the execution of the `SODD` command. (Default: false)

Note that the first row of every file generated by `SODD` is a header containing the names of the columns. This row is absent in the internal tables.

A more detailed description can be found in .

### DETUNE

The attribute `DETUNE` triggers the calculation of the detuning function terms in first and second order in the strength of the multipoles.

If the logical attribute `PRINT_AT_END` is set to true, the following two files, and corresponding tables, are created:

- "detune_1_end" contains five columns : multipole order, horizontal or vertical plane coded as 1 or 2, horizontal or vertical detuning, order of horizontal invariant and order of vertical invariant.

- "detune_2_end" contains five columns : first multipole order, second multipole order, horizontal detuning, order of horizontal invariant and order of vertical invariant.

If the logical attribute `PRINT_ALL` is set to true, the following two files, and corresponding tables, are created :

- "detune_1_all" contains five columns : multipole order, horizontal or vertical plane coded as 1 or 2, horizontal or vertical detuning, order of horizontal invariant and order of vertical invariant.

- "detune_2_all" contains five columns : first multipole order, second multipole order, horizontal detuning, order of horizontal invariant and order of vertical invariant.

### DISTORT1

The attribute `DISTORT1` triggers the calculation of the distortion function and the Hamiltonian terms in first order in the strength of the multipoles.

If the logical attribute `PRINT_AT_END` is set to true, the following two files, and corresponding tables are created:

- "distort_1_F_end" contains eight columns : multipole order, cosine and sine part of distortion, amplitude of distortion, j, k, l, m.

- "distort_1_H_end" contains eight columns : multipole order, cosine and sine part of Hamiltonian, amplitude of Hamiltonian, j, k, l, m.

If the logical attribute `PRINT_ALL` is set to true, the following two files, and corresponding tables, are created :

- "distort_1_F_all" contains eleven columns : multipole order, appearance number in position range, number of resonance, position, cosine and sine part of distortion, amplitude of distortion, j, k, l, m.

- "distort_1_H_all" contains eleven columns : multipole order, appearance number in position range, number of resonance, position, cosine and sine part of Hamiltonian, amplitude of Hamiltonian, j, k, l, m.

### DISTORT2

The attribute `DISTORT2` triggers the calculation of the distortion function and Hamiltonian terms in second order in the strength of the multipoles.

If the attribute `PRINT_AT_END` is set to true, the following two files, and corresponding tables, are created:

- "distort_2_F_end" contains nine columns : first multipole order, second multipole order, cosine and sine part of distortion, amplitude of distortion, j, k, l, m.

- "distort_2_H_end" contains nine columns : first multipole order, second multipole order, cosine and sine part of Hamiltonian, amplitude of Hamiltonian, j, k, l, m.
