## 5.1 Expressions

The param command is unique in that when the value of any argument is a valid numerical expression
containing at least one operator, the expression will be evaluated and the parameter will be defined as
the number (rather than the string of the expression). This permits the computation of rotations (the
value of the rotation argument is a string containing multiple numerical values):
param angle=atan2($a,$b)*180/3.14159
place Element rotation=X$angle,Y90

Expressions can be used for the value of any integer or double argument to any command. They are
evaluated during command processing, and generally must involve only double values and the operators
and functions listed below. Parameter expansion ($paramname) can be used as long as the string value
of paramname is valid where it appears in the expression. Some commands expand the expressions to
include certain variables (e.g. the Bx argument to fieldexpr can be an expression involving x,y,z).

In the param command, if the value of an argument is a valid numerical expression, the parameter is set
to a string representation of the the numerical value rather than to the expression string.

All values are doubles; for integer parameters the conversion occurs after the expression is evaluated.

The following arithmetic operators can be used in expressions: + - * / ^ (  ). Note that ^ means
exponentiation to an integer power (use pow() for a double exponent). Note that % is not implemented.

The following comparison operators can be used in expressions; they evaluate to a value of 1.0 (true) or
0.0 (false): <  <=  >  >=  ==  !=

The following logical operators behave as in C: ||  &&.

DO NOT USE the bitwise operators (&  |  ~), as these bitwise operations behave rather strangely for
double values.

The a?b:c operator is not implemented but there is a similar if(a,b,c) function.

The following functions can be used in expressions: abs(), min(),max(), sqrt(), pow(), sin(), cos(), tan(),
asin(), acos(), atan(), atan2(), sinh(), cosh(), tanh(), exp(), log(), log10(), floor(), ceil(), if(). All take 1
argument except min(), max(), pow(), and atan2() take 2 arguments and if() takes 3.

The following constants are pre-defined: pi, e, gamma, radian (=1.0), rad (=1.0), degree (=pi/180.), deg
(=pi/180.).
### 5.2 Element Names

When you create an element (e.g. using the tubs command), you must specify its name as the first
positional argument. When you place it into the simulated world, its name must be the first positional
