## 5.3 Parameters

argument to the place command (it can be renamed when placed). Element names can be any string, but
conventionally obey the rules of a C identifier.

Element names are necessary to correlate the definition and placement of each element. They are also
used to report errors in the geometry test, and are listed in the traces when stepping. The name of a
virtualdetector becomes the name of its NTuple.

When elements are placed inside another element, the name of the parent is prepended to the name of
the placed daughter, so the name shows its element hierarchy. This makes it desirable to capitalize the
first letter of each name. The “World” volume-name is not prepended (otherwise it would apply to every
element name). The rename= argument to the place command can be used to override the name of the
element (the default is without the parent’s name, but rename=+Xyz will prepend the parent’s name to
Xyz); ‘#’ can be used to automatically number multiple placements (see the place command in section 6
for details).

There are several independent name spaces used by various commands:
Type
Defined by
Used by
Element names
Element definition commands
place command
Virtualdetector names
Name of the virtualdetector, as placed
ntuple command
Material names
Material command
(many materials are predefined).
Element definition commands,
material=name argument
Coil names
coil command
solenoid command
Parameter names
param command
param command, $name

Parameters are named ASCII strings that can be used in the input.file to set command arguments, and
some are used to control the program. They can be set either on the command line or by the param
command. They are stored internally as ASCII strings, and when they represent an integer or floatingpoint value they are converted when used (invalid values are errors). When a parameter that has not been
defined is used, it will be automatically defined from the environment if possible; otherwise using an
undefined parameter generates an error (this is especially useful in Grid jobs, which may need
$OSG_WN_TMP in every filename).

A parameter can be used in the value of any argument to any command:

tubs Name length=$length outerRadius=$radius
In this example, it is necessary to define the parameters length and radius before this command is
issued; that can be either earlier in the input.file or on the command line. Here the string definitions of
both parameters length and radius must be valid floating-point numbers (or expressions):

# (earlier in the input.file)

param length=100.0 radius=10.0
Or on the command line:

g4bl input.file length=100.0 radius=10.0 [… ]
Note that once the parameter is defined, it can be used any number of times to give the values of
command arguments. That can be used to avoid having to change many identical numerical values

throughout the input.file. It can also be used to collect all of the variable values of input.file in one place
near the top, or even in a separate definition file (see the include command).

This is a limited macro facility, and can only be used to substitute the string value of a parameter into a
command argument (named or positional). For integer and double (real) arguments, arithmetic
expressions involving constants can be used (including common functions like sin() and sqrt()):

param a=3.0 b=2.0 name=Name

tubs $name length=$a+$b outerRadius=sqrt($b)*10

In the param command only, argument values that are a valid numeric expression with at least one
operator are converted to the value of the expression. This permits such parameters to be used to
perform computations for rotations (and colors, if desired):
param angle=atan2($a,$b)*180/3.14159
place Element rotation=X$angle,Y90

NOTE: $name used in a macro body (the define command) is substituted when the macro is defined, not
when the macro is expanded. $$name in a macro body will be expanded when the macro is invoked.

It is possible to re-define the value of a given parameter name within input.file; the value substituted for
$name is the most recent definition preceding its use. Because this can be confusing to humans, it is
discouraged (except for the do and for commands). The –unset argument to param will set parameters
only if they are not already defined; this is useful to put default values of parameters into input.file while
permitting them to be overridden on the command line; it does not work for parameters used to control
the program (they are pre-defined with default values).
#### 5.3.1 Program Control Parameters

Several parameters are used internally by G4beamline to control its operation:
Name
Default
Description
viewer
“none”
Determines the mode of the program, visualization or
tracking. Also determines the visualization driver to use.
See section 2.8 above.
steppingVerbose 0
When nonzero causes each step to be printed to stdout.
steppingFormat
(see below)
The format of lines printed by steppingVerbose.
histoFile
g4beamline.root The histogram output filename.
histoUpdate
0
When nonzero causes G4beamline to update the histoFile
after each block of this many events have been tracked.
worldMaterial
Vacuum
The material of the World volume.
Zcl
-
Initially 0, the place command sets Zcl to the downstream Z
position of the placed element, when using Centerline
coordinates (not for Global coordinates or placements into
elements other than the World). The user can set Zcl, but
that has no effect on the place command.
eventTimeLimit
30
CPU Time limit on each event (sec)
fieldVoxels
200,200,200
Size of voxels for field computation (mm,mm,mm)
maxStep
100
Maximum physics step size, global. Each element can have
its own value for maxStep.
