## 5.4 Pillbox Geometry and Dimensions

wallClockLimit
-1
Limit on wall clock time for the entire job (seconds). <0
means infinite.

There are also parameters that control the values of Geant4 tracking parameters, discussed in section 4.2.

The steppingFormat parameter controls how the steppingVerbose printing is performed. It is a sequence
of names of track attributes (separated by commas or spaces):
EXT
toggle extended precision (3 more digits)
TAG
print a '>' (useful to grep output)
N
step number
NSTEP
Synonym of N
GLOBAL
X,Y,Z,T in global coords
XYZT
Synonym of GLOBAL
CL
X,Y,Z,dxdz,dydz in CL coords
CLX
extended precision CL
KE
kinetic energy
STEP
step length
STEPLEN
Synonym of STEP
VOL
volume name
VOLNAME
Synonym of VOL
PROCESS
process name
B
magnetic field
E
electric field
P
3-momentum
MAT
material name
ID
event ID, track ID, parent ID
PART
particle name
SEG
centerline coord segment number
WT
weight
POLAR
polarization
NL
<newline>
NEWLINE
Synonym of NL
\n
Synonym of NL
The default format is “N GLOBAL CL KE STEP VOL PROCESS”. These names are insensitive to
case.

See the printf command for another way to display track information, and the trace command for a third.

The geometrical dimensions of the pillbox are given in the figure below showing a radial cross-section.
The pipe, walls, and collars are always made of copper; the stepped windows (win1 and win2) are made
of winMat, and the interior of the cavity is cavityMaterial. The entire pillbox is cylindrically symmetric
around the beam axis. The win1-s, the win2-s, the collars, the walls, and the pipe can each be omitted by
setting the corresponding thickness to zero.
