## 5.8 G4beamline Commands by Type

### 5.6 Cornerarc geometry

The cornerarc command approximates an arc in the centerline coordinates by using three corner-s
arranged so the path length is the same as that of the arc. The figure is for angle=90 (degrees). The z
value is that of Corner 1. The path length is determined by centerRadius and angle.

5.7 genericquad Aperture
The genericquad command can have two types of aperture: a circle and a “rounded +”. The former is
specified by setting apertureRadius nonzero; the latter is controlled by the parameters shown in the
figure. Note the rounded + aperture uses circles to approximate the poles (real magnet poles are between
hyperbola and circle, to compensate for proximity to the neighboring pole and the coil).

This section is just the output of the “help” command, with a little re-formatting.

The help command:
help         provides interactive help.

centerRadius
angle
Corner 1
Corner 2
Corner 3
centerRadius
Centerline
Coordinates

coilHalfwidth
coilRadius
poleTipRadius
ironRadius

coilHalfwidth
coilRadius
poleTipRadius
ironRadius

ironRadius
apertureRadius

man          Alias for 'help'.

Program control commands:
define       defines a macro (argument-expanded set of commands).
do           Do loop.
endgroup     ends a group definition.
exit         exit a command file.
for          For loop.
g4ui         Accesses the Geant4 user interface
geometry     Arranges to perform a geometry test.
group        begins definition of a group.
if           Conditional execution of command(s), and if/elseif/else/endif.
include      includes a command file.
list         provides interactive list of interesting internal tables.
output       redirects stdout and stderr to a file
param        Defines parameter values.
randomseed   control pseudo random number generator seeds
showmaterial Set the colors for selected materials.
trackermode  Sets mode for all trackers, manages track fitting.
tune         Tune a variable used as argument to other elements.

Centerline layout commands:
corner       Implement a corner in the centerline.
cornerarc    Implement a cornerarc in the centerline.
expandworld  Expand the world to include specified points.
start        Define the initial start of centerline coordinates.

Beam definition commands:
beam         Define the Beam.
cosmicraybeam Define a Cosmic-Ray muon 'beam'.
isotropicsource Define an isotropic source.
particlesource Interface to the Geant4 General Particle Source.
rdecaysource Generates a 'beam' from radioactive isotopes in the world.
reference    Define a reference particle.

Auxiliary definition commands:
material     construct a new material.
particlecolor Set the colors for tracks by particle name.
trackcolor   Alias for 'particlecolor'.

Beamline element definition commands:
absorber     construct an absorber
boolean      Construct an element from a boolean operation between
elements.
box          construct a box.
coil         defines a coil (part of a solenoid)
cylinder     Alias for 'tubs'.
extrusion    construct a solid extrusion with axis along z
fieldexpr    implements a field map, E and/or B, from expressions.
fieldmap     implements a field map, E and/or B, from a file.
genericbend  construct a generic bending magnet.
genericquad  construct a generic quadrupole magnet.
genericsectorbend construct an generic sector bending magnet.
helicaldipole construct a helicaldipole magnet.

helicalharmonic construct a helicalharmonic magnet.
idealsectorbend construct an ideal sector bending magnet.
lilens       construct a simple Lithium lens.
multipole    construct a generic multipole magnet.
particlefilter Will kill particles from a list, or force particles to
decay.
pillbox      Defines a pillbox RF cavity
polycone     construct a polycone with axis along z
rfdevice     Defines an rfdevice (RF cavity)
solenoid     defines a solenoid (a coil and current)
sphere       construct a sphere (or section of one)
tess         Alias for 'tessellatedsolid'.
tessellatedsolid construct a tessellatedsolid.
torus        construct a torus.
trap         construct a solid trapezoid with axis along z.
tube         Alias for 'tubs'.
tubs         construct a tube or cylinder with axis along z.

The place command:
place        places an element into the current group (or world).

Track and Event cuts:
eventcuts    Implements cuts on event number via lists in files.
trackcuts    Specifies per-track cuts.

Data output commands:
beamlossntuple NTuple containing particle tracks when lost.
detector     Construct a Detector that generates an NTuple.
fieldntuple  Generates an NTuple from B and E fields at specified points.
newparticlentuple NTuple containing particle tracks when created.
ntuple       Define an NTuple containing multiple detectors.
printf       prints track variables and expressions
printfield   Prints E or B fields, or writes FieldMap file.
probefield   Prints B and E fields at specified points.
profile      write beam profile information to a file
sample       Sample tracks into an NTuple.
timentuple   Construct an NTuple of tracks at a specified time.
totalenergy  Print total energy deposited in selected volumes.
trace        Specifies tracing of tracks.
tracker      Defines a tracker.
trackerplane Construct a tracker plane.
usertrackfilter Construct a usertrackfilter that filters tracks via user
code.
virtualdetector Construct a VirtualDetector that generates an NTuple.
zntuple      Generate an NTuple for each of a list of Z positions.

Physics commands:
bug1021      Workaround to improve accuracy of bug1021 in E field
muminuscapturefix Fixes up the G4MuonMinusCapture process.
muonium      Define the muonium (Mu) particle and processes.
physics      Defines the physics processes and controls them.
setdecay     Set lifetime, decay channels, and branching ratios for a
particle's decay.
spacecharge  Beam-frame Green's function space charge computation

spacechargelw Lienard-Wiechert space charge computation

Other commands:
collective   Monitor collective computation
demo         demo command.
elementdb    Generates the Element.db file from internal data.
fieldlines   Display magnetic field lines.
label        Display labels, markers, or polylines visually in 3-D space.
movie        Generate movie NTuple.
sourceonly   Run a source-only simulation.
survey       survey command.
test         test random number seeds.

Program control Parameters:
Zcl                 Last centerline Z position used (updated continuously)
deltaChord          Geant4 tracking parameter
deltaIntersection   Geant4 tracking parameter
deltaOneStep        Geant4 tracking parameter
epsMax              Geant4 tracking parameter
epsMin              Geant4 tracking parameter
eventTimeLimit      CPU Time Limit (sec)
fieldVoxels         Size of voxels for field computation (mm)
histoFile           Default (Root) NTuple output filename
histoUpdate         Output update interval (events)
maxStep             Maximum physics step size (mm)
minStep             Minimum step size (mm)
steppingFormat      Format for printing steps
steppingVerbose     Set nonzero to print each step
viewer              Visualization driver selected (default=none)
wallClockLimit      Limit on wall clock time in seconds; -1 is infinite
worldMaterial       Material of the World volume
zTolerance          Tolerance for Z steps (mm)

viewer can be just a name, in which case the Geant4 /run/beamOn command
must be used to generate events to be displayed. viewer can also have two
or three parts: 'name,1,1' where the first 1 is the number of events per
image and the second 1 is the number of images to generate. For the 'best'
viewer, which is Open Inventor, 999999 images are generated, and the user
does File/Escape to advance from one image to the next.

steppingFormat is a space- or comma-separated list of items:
EXT       toggle extended precision (3 more digits)
TAG       print a '>' (useful to grep output)
N         step number
NSTEP     Synonym of N
GLOBAL    X,Y,Z,T in global coords
XYZT      Synonym of GLOBAL
CL        X,Y,Z,dxdz,dydz in CL coords
CLX       extended precision CL
KE        kinetic energy
STEP      step length
STEPLEN   Synonym of STEP
VOL       volume name
VOLNAME   Synonym of VOL

PROCESS   process name
B         magnetic field
E         electric field
P         3-momentum
MAT       material name
ID        event ID, track ID, parent ID
PART      particle name
SEG       centerline coord segment number
WT        weight
POLAR     polarization
NL        <newline>
NEWLINE   Synonym of NL
\n        Synonym of NL
