# Trailing Material
## Known Differences to Other Programs

### Definitions in `MAD-8`

`MAD-8` uses full 6-by-6 matrices to allow coupling effects to be treated, and the canonical variable set ($`x`$ , $`p_x / p_0`$), ($`y`$ , $`p_y / p_0`$), ($`-ct`$ , $`\delta E / p_0 c`$), as opposed to other programs most of which use the set ($`x`$, $`x'`$), ($`y`$, $`y'`$), ($`-\delta s`$), $`\delta p / p_0`$).

Like Dragt , `MAD-8` uses the relative energy error $`p / p_0`$, which is equal the relative momentum error $`\mathtt{delta} = \delta p / p_0`$ multiplied by $`\beta = v/c`$.

As from Version 8.13, `MAD-8` used an additional **constant** momentum error $`\mathtt{delta}_s`$ in all optical calculations. The transfer maps contained the **exact** dependence upon this value; therefore the tunes for large deviations could be computed with high accuracy as opposed to previous versions.

The choice of canonical variables in `MAD-X` still leads to slightly different definitions of the lattice functions. In `MAD-X` the Courant-Snyder invariants mentioned in take the form

$`W_x = \gamma_x x^2 - 2 \alpha_x x p_x + \beta_x  p_x^2`$

Comparison to the original form

$`W_x = \gamma_x x^2 - 2 \alpha_x x x' + \beta_x  {x'}^2`$

shows that the orbit functions cannot be the same.

A more detailed analysis, using $`x' = p_x / (1 + \delta)`$ shows that all formulas can be made consistent by defining the MAD orbit functions (index M) with respect to the Courant and Snyder functions (index C) as follows:

$`\beta_{xM} = \beta_{xC} \times (1 + \delta)`$,\
$`\alpha_{xM} = \alpha_{xC}`$,\
$`\gamma_{xM} = \gamma_{xC} / (1 + \delta)`$

For constant $`\delta_s`$ along the beam line and $`\delta = 0`$, the lattice functions are the same. In a machine where $`\delta`$ varies along the circumference, *e.g.* in a linear accelerator or in an electron-positron storage ring, the definition of the Courant-Snyder invariants must be generalised. The `MAD-8` invariants have the advantage that they remain invariants along the beam line even for variable $`\delta`$.

With the new method this problem occurs in Twiss module (see <a href="#chap:twiss" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="chap:twiss">2</a>) only for non-constant $`\delta`$.

### Treatment of Energy Error in TWISS

It has been noted by Milutinovic and Ruggiero that `MAD-8` returned tunes which are too low for non-zero $`\delta`$. The difference was found to be quadratic in delta with a negative coefficient. This problem has been eliminated thanks to the new treatment of momentum errors from `MAD-8` Version 8.13 onwards.
