# Trailing Material
## `MAD-X` recipes and pitfalls

Find a loose collection of pitfalls that may be difficult to avoid in particular for new users but also experienced user might profit from this list.

Twiss calculation is 4D only!  
The Twiss command will calculate an approximate 6D closed orbit when the accelerator structure includes an active [cavity](#sec:rf-cavity). However, the calculation of the Twiss parameters are 4D only. This may result in apparently non-closure of the beta values in the plane with non-zero dispersion. The full 6D Twiss parameters can be calculated with the [`PTC_TWISS`](#chap:ptc-twiss) command. The [Thinlens Tracking](#chap:thintrack) module presently suffers from this deficiency since it requires the true 6d closed orbit and not the approximate one as calculated by Twiss. In this context one has to mention that the coordinate system for the Twiss module is not x, px in the horizontal plane as the advertised canonical coordinates instead x, x’ have been used (same for the vertical plane).

Be careful that for `TWISS` with the `CENTRE` attribute activated, *i.e.* looking inside the element, the closed orbit includes the misalignment of the element.

Dispersion for machines with small relativistic beta  
`MAD-X` uses the PT coordinate as the canonical momentum in the longitudinal plane. The derivative of e.g. dispersion is therefore not taken wrt delta-p over p but PT. Therefore one unfortunately finds the dispersion being divided by the relativistic beta which is annoying for low energy machines. PTC allows to change the coordinate system to delta-p over p with the "time=false" option of the [`PTC_CREATE_LAYOUT`](#sec:ptc-create-layout) command which delivers the proper dispersion with the

Non-standard definition of DDX, DDPX, DDY, DDPY  
The `MAD-X` proper defintion of `DDX, DDPX, DDY, DDPY` is **not** the second order derivative with respect to deltap/p. In order to get the second order derivative you need to multiply the value by 2. The corresponding values from [`PTC_NORMAL`](#chap:ptc-normal) and in [`PTC_TWISS`](#chap:ptc-twiss) are the proper derivaties to all orders.

Chromaticity calculation in presence of coupling  
Chromaticity calculations are typically in order and agree with `PTC` and other codes. However, it was recently discovered that in presences of coupling `MAD-X` simply seems to ignore coupling when the chromaticity is calculated. This is surprising since the eigentunes Q1, Q2 are properly calculated for a given (small!) dp/p. The issue is under investigation.

Field errors in thick elements  
Only a very limited number of field error components are considered in [`TWISS`](#chap:twiss) calculations for some thick elements. Find below a complete list of all those field error components that are taking into account for a particular thick element. It should be mentioned that [`BEND`](#sec:bend)s also allow a skew quadrupole component K1s but NOT in the body of the magnet. It is only active in the edge effect for radiation (expert use only).

| **Magnet Type** | **Normal Field Components** | **Skew Field Components** |
|:---------------:|:---------------------------:|:-------------------------:|
|                 |           Dipole            |             —             |
|      Bend       |         Quadrupole          |             —             |
|                 |          Sextupole          |             —             |
|     HKicker     |           Dipole            |             —             |
|     VKicker     |              —              |          Dipole           |
|   Quadrupole    |         Quadrupole          |        Quadrupole         |
|    Sextupole    |          Sextupole          |         Sextupole         |
|    Octupole     |          Octupole           |         Octupole          |

`MAD-X` versus `PTC`  
The user has to understand that `PTC` exists inside of `MAD-X` as a library. `MAD-X` offers the interface to `PTC`, i.e. the `MAD-X` input file is used as input for `PTC`. Internally, both `PTC` and `MAD-X` have their own independent databases which are linked via the interface. With the [`PTC_CREATE_LAYOUT`](#sec:ptc-create-layout) command, only numerical numbers are transferred from the `MAD-X` database to the `PTC` database. Any modification to the `MAD-X` database is ignored in `PTC` until the next call to [`PTC_CREATE_LAYOUT`](#sec:ptc-create-layout) For example, a deferred expression of `MAD-X` after a [`PTC_CREATE_LAYOUT`](#sec:ptc-create-layout) command is ignored within `PTC`.

When introducing a cavity with the `HARMON` attribute instead of the `FREQ` attribute (highly discouraged!) a problem arises for [`PTC_TWISS`](#sec:ptc-twiss) due to the fact that internally `HARMON` is transferred to `FREQ` too late. A simple [`TWISS`](#chap:twiss) command executed before `PTC` start-up will help. However, avoiding `HARMON` is advantageous.

SLOW attribute in matching  
The `SLOW` attribute enforces the old matching procedure and is considerably slower. Therefore we did not make it the default option. Recently a number of parameters, like `RE56`, have been added to the list of matchable parameters in the default and fast version. Nevertheless, some parameters are only available when using the `SLOW` attribute. Therefore it is advisable to check with the `SLOW` attribute if there are doubts about the matching procedure.

Validity of Twiss parameters  
The standard Teng-Edwards Twiss parameters suffer from a deficiency near full coupling: i.e. the "donuts" of linear motion in x-x’ and y-y’ phase space have no hole anymore. This means that all energy is transfered from one plane to the other. In this case the Twiss parameters and the coupling matrix (`R11, R12, R21, R22`) become large or even infinite or the beta functions might become negative. The Ripken-Mais Twiss parameters are always well defined (they are the "average" amplitude functions of their proper phase space region), i.e. at full coupling we have: beta11 $`\sim`$ beta12 and beta21 $`\sim`$ beta22. Using the `RIPKEN` flag [`TWISS`](#chap:twiss) calculates the Mais-Ripken parameters via a transformation from the Teng-Edwards Twiss parameters. Obviously this fails when the Teng-Edwards Twiss parameters are ill defined. In this case one has to rely on [`PTC_TWISS`](#chap:ptc-twiss).

MAKETHIN might invalidate a sequence  
Several `MAD-X` commands such as `ELIGN`, `EFCOMP` won’t work on sequences produced by `MAKETHIN`. In order to use such commands on thin sequences, it is advisable to save the sequence on a file, and then re-load it.
