# Trailing Material
## Contributors to `MAD-X`

Lists are provided in alphabetical order.

Disclaimer: any omissions in these lists are accidental.

Feel free to contact mad support [(mad@cern.ch)](mailto:mad.support@cern.ch) if you have been left out or some of your contributions are not listed.

### MAD team

The list includes all the persons officially working on the `MAD-X` project.

Laurent Deniau: project manager since june 2011.\
Andrea Latina: since october 2011.\
Piotr Skowronski: since january 2012.\
Irina Tecker: since january 2015.\

### Module keepers and contributors

This list includes all the volunteers who accepted to maintain and develop some of the `MAD-X` modules.

Fanouria Antoniou: ibs.\
Helmut Burkhardt: makethin.\
Riccardo De Maria: match2.\
Laurent Deniau: survey.\
Valery Kapin (FNAL, Chicago): ptc_track.\
Emanuele Laface (ESS, Sweden): match.\
Andrea Latina: trac, twiss.\
Yannis Papaphilippou: dynap.\
Ghislain Roy: aperture, error, cororbit, touschek, c6t, plot.\
Piotr Skowronski: (ptc_trac), ptc_twiss, ptc_normal, ptc_module.\
Irina Tecker: trac, twiss, documentation.\
Rogelio Tomas: emit.

We are looking for volunteers, any help is welcome!

### Special contributors

This list includes all the persons who have contributed exceptionally to the project in the past.

Frank Schmidt: project custodian from 2002 to 2011.\
Etienne Forest: author of PTC & FPP (written in F90).\
Hans Grote: author of the core (written in C).

### Other contributors

The list below includes the persons who have contributed significantly to the `MAD-X` project in the past. Unless noted they were affiliated with CERN at the time of their contributions.

Ralph Assmann (emit)\
Oliver Bruning (match)\
Hans Grote (Core in C, plot)\
Werner Herr (error, cororbit)\
Bernard Jeanneret (aperture)\
Alex Koschik (thintrack)\
Nikolay Malitsky - BNL, New-York (sxf)\
Eric McIntosh (memory leaks)\
Jean Luc Nougaret (twiss, ptc_twiss, C/Fortran wrappers, bug tracker)\
Thys Risselada (threader, closed orbit)\
Frank Schmidt (c6t, twiss, sodd, ptc_twiss, ptc_module, ptc_normal)\
Yipeng Sun (thintrack)\
Frank Tecker (survey)\
André Verdier (survey)\
Lingyun Yang (tpsa)\
Frank Zimmermann (dynap, touschek, ibs)\
**`MAD-9` contributors**\
Christoph Iselin is the author of MAD-9 and a major contributor to the Classic library.

**`MAD-8` contributors**\
Hans Grote and Christoph Iselin are the authors of `MAD-8`.
