## 1.10

The raw output of GPT consists of arrays containing the coordinates of the macro-particles and the electromagnetic fields. To efficiently accommodate additional output variables and parameter scans, the General Datafile Format (GDF) was developed. A GDF file consists of a number of GDF blocks, where every block contains binary data with a name. The *x-*coordinates of the particles for example are all written in a single block named `x`. Because all particle coordinates need to be written for every time output and every screen output, the GDF database is hierarchical. The blocks can be grouped together, where the groupname is itself a GDF block with name and data. For time output, the block name is `time` and the data is the simulation time itself. The GDF equivalent of such a structure is shown in Figure 1-5. Screen output is analogous, with block name `position` and the data the *z*-coordinate in the local coordinate system of the screen. etc=...... G={.......} z={.......} y={.......} x={.......} z={.......} time=2 ns y={.......} x={.......} time=1 ns etc=...... G={.......} z={.......} y={.......} x={.......} z={.......} y={.......} x={.......}

Figure 1-5: GDF representation of the outputfile. The blocks represent a GDF-object and its data. The indentation represents the internal hierarchy. Although studying particle coordinates at consecutive output times can be very useful, generally macroscopic quantities like bunchlength, emittance and standard deviations are needed as well. The GDFA program is written to extract such information directly from the GPT outputfile.

When the effect of any parameter needs to be studied, the Multiple Run (MR) facility can be used. MR instructs GPT to run with one varying parameter and creates one outputfile containing the results of all the simulations. Such an outputfile is schematically shown in Figure 1-6 where the effects of different settings for the variable phi are calculated. time=5 ns time=2 ns phi=1 mrad Particles Particles Particles Particles Particles Particles Particles Particles Particles time=1 ns phi=5 mrad phi=2 mrad

Figure 1-6: MR Output when multiple time output is written for various settings of the parameter `phi`. GDFA needs extra information before such a file can be processed. When for example the average *z-* coordinate versus the standard *z* deviation, a measure for bunch length, need to be studied, there are two possibilities. 1. For every value of phi: Calculate average z and bunchlength. Every point is calculated at a different time. 2. For every time: Calculate average z and bunchlength. Every point is calculated for a different setting of `phi`. One option is not arguably better than/preferable over the other, as depends on what needs to be studied. Therefore GDFA needs an additional parameter, which is named `group_by`. This parameters pecifies which level of hierarchy collapses. The first of the two options mentioned above groups by `time`, the second groups by `phi`. The `group_by` parameter itself is always output as an array in the produced outputfile.

For a complete description of all the GDF programs we refer to chapter 3. Table 1-E lists the description of the names in the GPT outputfile
