## 1.1 The GPT inputfile

The crucial part of every GPT simulation consists of an ASCII inputfile describing the simulation to be performed. Apart from describing the set-up, this file also specifies the initial particle distribution, the calculation accuracy and when/where to write output. If desired, the inputfile can be split separated into a number of individual files. The extension of a GPT inputfile is `.in` by convention. A typical inputfile is shown in Listing 1-1 sending a very basic 6 nC, 2 MeV bunch of electrons through a single solenoid. The formal specification of the GPT inputfile syntax is given in section 4.1.

**Listing 1-1:** `Experi.in`: A simple GPT experiment.

```
# Basic beam parameters
Eo   = 2e6 ;

# Energy [eV]
G    = 1+|qe|*Eo/(me*c^2) ;
# Corresponding Lorentz factor G
Beta = sqrt(1-G^-2) ;

# Corrsponding normalized velocity
rxy  = 5e-3 ;

# Bunch radius [m]
zlen = 1e-3 ;

# Bunch length [m]
Qtot = -6e-9 ;

# Total charge in tlen [C]

# Simulation parameters
nps  = 50 ;

# Number of particles
# Start bunch
setparticles("beam",nps,me,qe,Qtot) ;
setrxydist("beam","u", rxy/2,rxy) ;
setphidist("beam","u", 0, 2*pi) ;
setzdist("beam","u", 0, zlen ) ;
setGdist("beam","u", G, 0 ) ;

# Space-charge
if( Qtot!=0 ) spacecharge3D() ;

# Set-up
solenoid("wcs","z",0.2, 0.1, 40000) ;

# Output
tout(0,1.3e-9,0.02e-9) ;

The first section of this file defines the basic beam parameters. In this example, the bunch is cylindrically symmetric with an energy of 2 MeV. The bunch length is 1 mm, the beam radius is 5 mm and the total bunch charge is 6 nC. All parameters are in SI units, except when specified otherwise. None of the user variables have a special meaning; They are just for convenience to make the inputfile more readable.

The simulation parameters typically define the number of particles and the simulation accuracy. As the `accuracy` keyword, see section 4.3.2, is not specified in this case, the default timestep mechanism is used.

The electron bunch is started using the start elements as explained in section 1.6. The `setparticles` element fills the particle set `"beam"` with `nps` particles carrying a total charge `Qtot`. The predefined variables `me` and `qe` are the mass and charge of an electron respectively. After the particles are created, the following keywords each modify part of the real- or velocity-space of the set, allowing full control over the initial particle distribution. In this example, the real-space is defined as a uniform cylinder with a 5 mm radius and 1 mm longitudinal length. Transverse velocity is not defined here which means that this component is zero. Longitudinal velocity is introduced by setting the Lorentz factor 𝛾 without spread.

After the initial particle distribution is specified, the space-charge model must be chosen. In this case, a fully 3D treatment is requested with the `spacecharge3D` element as described in section 4.8.3. Because the beam is cylindrically symmetric, the `spacecharge2Dcircle` element, see section 4.8.6, could be used as an alternative. The `if` statement removes the space-charge calculation altogether if the total charge is set to zero.

This set-up consists of only one solenoid, see section 4.6.15, positioned at longitudinal position z=0.2 m. As explained in section 1.4.2 it is possible to position any element anywhere in 3D space in any orientation. A realistic set-up typically consists of more beam-line components, modeled as built-in elements, field maps or custom elements.

GPT is a time-domain particle tracer, as explained in section 1.7. Therefore, the most natural form of output is a list of all particle coordinates at specific times. This can be specified with a `tout` statement. Alternatively, interpolated particle coordinates can be calculated at specific positions using the `screen` element. Both forms of output are described in section 1.9.
