## 1.2 Running GPT

The formal syntax of GPT is:

```
gpt [-hHv] [-o outfile] [-a outfile] infile [var=value] [GPTLICENSE=

-h
```
Print a short usage line.

```
-H
```
Print a usage line and a brief explanation of all options.

```
-v
```
Verbose mode: Various information about the progress of the simulation is written to `stderr`. Furthermore, the following numbers are printed at each timestep: • The number of particles simulated in the current timestep. • The simulation time *t* [s]. • The timestep *h* [s].

```
-j nCPU
```
Run simultaneously over `nCPU` processors in a multi-processor system. When not specified, all cores in the system are used.

```
-o outfile
```
Write the result of the calculations to `outfile`. If not specified output is written to `stdout`. We refer to sections 1.9 and 1.10 for more information about GPT outputfiles.

```
-a outfile
```
Append to `outfile`. This option is for internal use only.

```
infile
```
The name of the file that describes the experiment to be simulated. A dash `-` can be specified to force GPT to read from `stdin`. It is possible to list more than one inputfile.

```
var=value
```
Assign a value to a variable used but not defined in the inputfile. `GPTLICENSE=``N` Sets the GPT license number to `N`. Linux and standalone MS-Windows only.

GPTwin, the MS-Windows-based user interface for GPT, allows users to run a batch file containing the instructions to run GPT. Error messages and diagnostic output are shown in the message window. Linux users are advised to create a shell script.

The GPT executable reads the ASCII inputfile(s) describing the initial particle distribution, the calculation accuracy, the locations and parameters of all beam-line components and when/where output is required. Inputfiles typically have extension `.in`. The output of GPT is in the General Data Format (GDF), an hierarchical binary database specifically developed for the GPT project. Outputfiles typically have extension `.gdf`.

For an experiment named `experi`, the GPT inputfile is typically named `experi.in`. The correct instruction to run GPT is:

```
gpt [-v] –o experi.gdf experi.in [GPTLICENSE=
```
where the bracket notation indicates that these parameters are optional.

The `[-v]` notation means that `–v` can be optionally specified. When specified, verbose output is written in the message window in GPTwin and written to the terminal on Linux machines.

On Linux machines it is recommended to specify your GPT license number in the GPTLICENSE environment variable. Alternatively, it can be listed on the GPT command-line. On MS-Windows machines the license number is automatically set by the graphical user interface.

The command to run GPT is typically placed in a batch file named `experi.bat`. GPTwin users can open the batch file and click the Run button on the toolbar. GPTwin does not allow GPT inputfiles to be run directly. Linux users specify `sh experi.bat`, or any other instruction to run a sequence of commands. Especially when pre- or post-processing tools are required, such a batch file or shell script is very convenient. For example, the above GPT command is typically followed by an instruction to calculate particle trajectories and average beam parameters as shown in Figure 1-1:

```
gpt –o experi.gdf experi.in
gdftrans –o traj.gdf experi.gdf time x y z G
gdfa –o avgs.gdf experi.gdf time avgr avgz avgG

```
Figure 1-1: Particle trajectories and average beam parameters for the `experi.in` file as plotted by GPTwin. The experiment is a very strong solenoid lens at z=200 mm. Strong aberrations are present. It is possible to omit variables in the inputfile, and specify them on the command line instead. For example, if `rxy` would not have been definded in the inputfile, the following line would produce correct results:

```
gpt [-v] –o experi.gdf experi.in [GPTLICENSE=

```
It is also possible to pass string variables, for example to specify system dependent pathnames. For this to work, the string must be surrounded by double quotes escaped by a backslash: `mystring=\"pathname\"`.

`stderr` is Synonym for *Standard error*. This output is shown in the messages window of GPTwin. On Linux machines, it can be redirected using the operator `>&`. For example:

```
gpt -o test.gdf test.in >& logfile

```
`stdout` is Synonym for *Standard output*. This output is shown in the messages window of GPTwin, but can also serve as input to other applications using the operator `|`. For example:

```
gpt test.in | gdf2a

```
`stdin` is Synonym for *Standard input*. It can be the output of some other program using the operator `|` as shown in the example above. z [mm] -5 x [mm] avgz [mm] avgr [mm]

Error messages
