## 1.9 Output

The output of GPT mainly consists of the position and normalized velocity coordinates of all the macro- particles and optionally the electromagnetic fields at the positions of the particles. The output is written in GPT Datafile Format, GDF, explained in detail in section 1.10. Three output mechanisms are currently implemented: Snapshot, Position and Field output.

The GPT code solves the differential equations of motion in time-domain. Consequently, the most efficient output mechanism is output at specific simulation times. This can be done with the `snapshot` keyword that writes the phase-space coordinates of all particles to the GPT outpfile at arbitrary simulation time. Because the `snapshot` keyword does not affect the stepsizes taken by the ODE solver it produces no overhead, apart from disk I/O, and it does not affect the overall accuracy. It syntax is described in detail in section 4.3.11.

To obtain electromagnet field information, output can be generated with the `tout` keyword. This writes the electromagnetic fields at all particle positions to the outputfile. Internally, `tout` instructs the GPT ODE solver to decrease its stepsizes in such a way that the particle coordinates are calculated exactly at the specified times. The used algorithm looks ahead and starts to make small adjustments to the stepsizes ahead of the requested output time in order to end correctly. As a result, `tout` slows down the ODE solver. Furthermore, because stepsizes can be decreased but are never increased, `tout` increases the overall accuracy of the simulations. Relying on such a side-effect is not wise and we stongly suggest using the accuracy keyword to specify the overall simulation accuracy. For the exact syntax of the `tout` keyword please see reference section 4.3.15.

Position output can be requested using the `screen` keyword. The particle coordinates are recorded when they pass a specified non-destructive plane in 3D space. Any number of planes with any orientation can be specified. Starting from GPT version 3.10, the screen implementation in GPT is 'perfect' in the sense that the interpolation error is always smaller or equal compared to the tracking error. Screens need to buffer particle coordinates and involve high-order interpolations. Consequently they are slower and more resource intensive compared to snapshots. For more information we refer to reference section 4.3.10.

The coordinates of all the particles and optionally the electromagnetic fields are written as individual arrays in the GPT outputfile. For example, `x` is an array of all the x-coordinates of all the particles. A description of the arrays written to the outputfile is given in Table 1-F. How the outputfile is structured is explained in the next section. Table 1-F: Description of the particle array columns in the GPT outputfile. Name Snapshot Screen Tout Description

```
ID
```
√ √ √ Particle identification numbers √ √ √ *x* coordinate [m]

```
y
```
√ √ √ *y* coordinate [m]

```
z
```
√ √ √ *z* coordinate [m]

```
Bx
```
√ √ √ Normalized velocity β𝑥

```
By
```
√ √ √ Normalized velocity β𝑦

```
Bz
```
√ √ √ Normalized velocity β𝑧

```
G
```
√ √ √ Lorentz factor γ

```
rxy
```
√ √ √ Distance to z-axis [m]

```
t

```
√

Time when particles cross the screen [s]

```
fEx

```
√ *Ex* field at the particle coordinates [V/m].

```
fEy

```
√ *Ey* field at the particle coordinates [V/m].

```
fEz

```
√ *Ez* field at the particle coordinates [V/m].

```
fBx

```
√ *Bx* field at the particle coordinates [T].

```
fBy

```
√ *By* field at the particle coordinates [T].

```
fBz

```
√ *Bz* field at the particle coordinates [T].

Within a user element, the GPT kernel can be instructed to call a specified routine at every time output. Typically this mechanism is used to write the parameters of custom differential equations in the outputfile, but it can also be very helpful for debugging purposes. For more information about this feature, we refer to the GPT Custom Elements documentation.

At the end of the simulation the variable `cputime` is written. It contains the CPU time, measured in seconds, between the previous and current time output. It can be used to track where most of the CPU time is spent. The variable `cputime` not listed in a time group is the total CPU time used by GPT.
