## 2.10 Photo-cathode, starting particles as function of time

This section demonstrates how to start particles as function of time. All files are located in the `tutorial/cathode` folder. The example is a 100 pC electron bunch, emerging from a flat photo-cathode during 100 fs. A typical set-up consists of a copper or semiconductor cathode surface illuminated by a laser pulse. Either an RF cavity or an electrostatic accelerating field must be present to accelerate the electrons away from the cathode. Space-charge effects are not included in this example, but can easily be added with the `spacecharge2Dcircle` element.

To start the electrons emerging from the cathode, we first define a particle set named `"beam"`, containing 1000 particles having a total charge of 100 pC.

```
# Photocathode
nps  = 1000 ;
# Start 1000 particles
Qtot = -100e-12 ;
# Total charge 100 pC
setparticles( "beam", nps, me, qe, Qtot ) ;

```
These particles are to be started uniformly in a 100 fs time interval, having an initial radius of 0.25 mm.

```
tlen = 100e-15 ;
# Laser pulse length: 100 fs
radius = 0.25e-3 ; # Bunch radius: 0.25 mm

```
The radial distribution of the particles is uniform `"u"` in *r* and is set using `setrxydist`. The third parameter of `setrxydist` is the center of the radial distribution, half the beam radius. The beam is cylindrical symmetric, specified as a uniform φ distribution over 2π using `setphidist`. This will result in a particle distribution as shown in Figure 2-38.

```
setrxydist( "beam", "u", radius/2, radius ) ;
setphidist( "beam", "u", 0, 2*pi ) ;

```
Figure 2-38: Particle distribution in xy-plane. The following code assumes that all electrons leave the cathode having an energy of precisely 0.4 eV. Initially, `setGBzdist` is used to set the corresponding γβz of all particles. Then the velocity component is homogeneously distributed over half a sphere using `setGBthetadist`. This element sets a spherical particle distribution in the γβz-γβ𝑟-plane, keeping the angle in the γβx-γβ𝑦-plane constant. `setGBphidist` must be used to enforce cylindrical symmetry. The half-sphere distribution of the particles is shown in Figure 2-39. Please note that these start conditions automatically determine the initial emittance.

```
Eo  = 0.4 ;

# Start with 0.4 eV
G   = 1-q*Eo/(m*c*c) ;
# Corresponding Gamma
GB  = sqrt(G^2-1) ; # Corresponding Gamma*Beta
setGBzdist(     "beam", "u", GB, 0 ) ;
setGBthetadist( "beam", "u", pi/4, pi/2 ) ;
setGBphidist( "beam", "u", 0, 2*pi ) ;

```
-
0.2
0.0
0.2 x [mm] -
0.3 -
0.2 -
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3 y [mm]

Figure 2-39: Phase space distribution. Before setting the time-distribution with `settdist`, it is important to check the initial particle distribution. All plots shown before are created with the `snapshot(0)` line and without using `settdist`.

When the simulation is started using the above lines, all particles are emitted from the cathode at *t*=0. The `settdist` element sets the time-distribution of the particles. The release-time is independent on all other coordinates, creating the possibility to start any particle anywhere, anytime. To make this tutorial simulation a little more interesting, we add a constant 100 MV/m electric field with the `erect` element to accelerate the electrons away from the cathode surface. In a rf photo-gun simulation it would be appropriate to use the `map25D_TM` element. 10. `# Start in time ` 11. `erect("wcs","I", 1,1,1, -100e6) ; # Constant electric field 100 MV/m ` 12. `settdist("beam", "u", 0, tlen) ; ` 13. `snapshot(-tlen/2, 1.5*tlen, tlen/10) ; `

The `settdist` keyword in this example sets a uniform distribution centered around zero having a total width of `tlen`. In other words, it starts all particles uniformly between –50 and 50 fs. As a result, the simulation time automatically starts at –50 fs to be able to take all particle trajectories into account. This is observed in the subsequent `snapshot `statement, where the first `snapshot `is requested at `–tlen/2`. In this case, this triggers a warning when running this inputfile because no particle starts at the outer left and right points of a distribution. The resulting particle distribution as function of time is shown in Figure 2-40.

Figure 2-40: Particle distribution at various simulation times. The number of particles linearly increases in the interval between –50 and 50 fs. To see the charge and particle emission as function of time, the GDFA program can be used:

```
gdfa -o avgs.gdf cathode.gdf time Q numpar
```
The results are shown in Figure 2-41.

-
0.2
0.0
0.2 x [mm] -
0.0015 -
0.0010 -
0.0005
0.0000
0.0005
0.0010
0.0015 Bx
0.000
0.001 Bz -
0.0015 -
0.0010 -
0.0005
0.0000
0.0005
0.0010
0.0015 Bx time=-4e-014 N(ID) = 102
0.0
0.2
0.4 z [micron] -
0.2
0.0
0.2 x [mm] time=3.15544e-030 N(ID) = 503
0.0
0.2
0.4 z [micron] -
0.2
0.0
0.2 x [mm] time=5e-014 N(ID) = 1000
0.0
0.2
0.4 z [micron] -
0.2
0.0
0.2 x [mm] time=1e-013 N(ID) = 1000
0.0
0.2
0.4 z [micron] -
0.2
0.0
0.2 x [mm]

Figure 2-41: Charge (left) and number of particles (right) as function of simulation time. -50 time [fs] Charge [pC] -50 time [fs] Number of particles
