## 2.11 Collector design

In this section we demonstrate how to use GPT to design a collector. The result is current and power density on the collector plate(s), where space-charge effects and multiple scattering are included. In this example, an artificial 20 mA, 500 eV electron beam is collected in a simple collector, stretched in y-direction, as shown in Figure 2-42. Section 2.11.7 explains how to design a cylindrical-symmetric collector. The potential on the electrode is –1 kV.

Figure 2-42: Sample collector with particle trajectories. The particle trajectories are imported in a 3D drawing program using the GDF2DXF program. The files for this tutorial section are located in the folder `gpt/tutorial/collector`.

### 2.11.1 Creating a GPT field-map

In this example, the Poisson code is used to calculate the potential. It is possible to use other field-solvers such as TOSCA or MAFIA. We refer to the ASCI2GDF and RAW2GDF programs for the conversion of the field-output to a GPT field map.

The Poisson-file needed to describe the simple collector is shown in Listing 2-17. Together with all other field-map related files, it can be found in the `fieldmap` subfolder of the collector tutorial files. This folder also includes a batch file named **collector.bat** containing all required commands to run Superfish and convert to the output to GPT format.

The commands to run Poisson are:

```
automesh collector.sf
poisson

```
Listing 2-17: collector.sf: Poisson file to describe the collector shown in Figure 2-42.

```
&reg dx=0.1, dy=0.1, conv=1.0, xmin=0,xmax=6, ymin=-1,ymax=4,icylin=0,
nbsup=0,nbslo=1,nbsrt=1,nbslf=0,kprob=0,xjfact=0.0 &

&po x=0,y=-1 &
&po x=6,y=-1 &
&po x=6,y=4 &
&po x=0,y=4 &
&po x=0,y=-1 &

```
&reg mat=0,voltage=0,ibound=-1 &
&po x=0,y=1 &
&po x=2,y=1 &
&po x=3,y=4 &
&po x=6,y=4 &
&po x=6,y=-1 &

&reg mat=0,voltage=0,ibound=-1 &
&po x=0,y=0 &
&po x=1,y=0 &
&po x=1,y=-1 &
&po x=0,y=-1 &
&po x=0,y=0 &

&reg mat=0,voltage=1000.0,ibound=-1 &
&po x=4,y=-1 &
&po x=4,y=0 &
&po x=5,y=3 &
&po x=5,y=-1 &
&po x=4,y=-1 &

The Poisson output cannot be used directly in GPT simulations. It must first be interpolated on a rectangular grid using sf7, and then converted to the GDF format with FISH2GDF:

```
sf7
fish2gdf -o collector.gdf outsf7.txt

```
The sf7 program requires an additional file, `collector.in7`, which describes the interpolation parameters as shown in Listing 2-18.

**Listing 2-18:** collector.in7: interpolation parameters

```
rect noscreen
0 -1 6 4
121 101
end

```
After the above commands are specified, the `collector.gdf` field-map is ready for use.

### 2.11.2 The GPT boundary file

Before the field-map created in section 2.11.1 can be used, the boundaries must be defined in a separate GPT inputfile. When the field-map is created using Poisson, this step is quite simple:

```
fishfile -g boundaries.in -y 1 collector.sf

```
The file `boundaries.in` now contains a description of all the boundaries in the `collector.sf` file. For a cylindrical-symmetric set-up, the boundaries are defined by `scattercone`, `scattertorus`, `scatterpipe` and other elements. Otherwise, the set-up contains just rectangular `scatterplate` elements.

### 2.11.3 Setting up the simulation

In the file listed in Listing 2-19 a 20 mA, 500 eV rectangular beam is started and send into the collector as described in section 2.11.1. Ofcourse this is not a realistic beam, but serves only as an example.

**Listing 2-19:** collector.in: Main GPT inputfile for simple collector

```
# Basic beam parameters
Eo   = 500 ;

# Energy [eV]
G    = 1-qe*Eo/(me*c*c) ;
# Corresponding Lorentz factor G []
Beta = sqrt(1-G^-2) ;

# Corrsponding Normalized velocity []
dE   = 0.2 ;

# Energy spread [fraction of Eo]
I    = 0.02 ;

# Beam current [A]

# Simulation parameters
tlen = 1e-9 ;

# Gun time [s]
nps  = 100 ;

# Number of particles []
Qtot = -I*tlen ;

# Total charge in tlen [C]
nmac = (Qtot/qe)/nps ;

# Initial nmacro
# Start a collection of particles (unphysical but simple rectangular beam)
setparticles("beam",nps,me,qe,Qtot) ;
setxdist("beam","u", 5e-3,3e-3) ;
setydist("beam","u", 0e-3,3e-3) ;
settdist("beam","u", tlen/2, tlen ) ;
setGdist("beam","u", G, dE*(G-1) ) ;

# Import collector field-map
Zcol = 0.0 ;
map2Dr_E("wcs","z",Zcol, "fieldmap/fieldmap.gdf","Y","X","Ey","Ex", 1,-Efac ) ;
zminmax("wcs","I", -1e-6, 1 ) ;

# Define scatter model
copperscatter_fix("wcs","z",Zcol, "copper",0.01*nmac,2*nmac) ;

# Spacecharge calculations
spacecharge3D ;

# Output specification
accuracy(5) ;
outputvalue("tlen",tlen) ;

```
```
# Used by hierarchical data-analysis
snapshot(0,1e-7,1e-10) ;

# Trajectory plots
# tcontinue(1e-7) ;

# Data analysis only

```
The field map of the collector is imported using the `map2Dr_E` element. For a cylindrical symmetric collector, `map2D_E` must be used. By convention, the collector is placed at longitudinal position `Zcol`. On the sample disk, the field strength is defined as `Efac` on the GPT command-line to be able to perform a scan in a later stage.

Normally collector simulations need to be performed for (semi) continuous beams. Because GPT is a time- domain code, such a beam is often represented by a much shorter bunch to save CPU time. In the above case, we start a beam with a uniform distribution during the variable `tlen`, equal to 1 ns. For reliable results, only 100 particles are typically insufficient. Because convergence is sometimes much slower, we strongly recommend rerunning the simulation with double the number of particles till the parameters of interest stabilize.

The `copperscatter` element is used to define all the scatter statistics. For a simulation of the primary beam only, the `forwardscatter` element with a probability of 0 can be used instead.

The `snapshot` statement is required for trajectory plotting. Only `tcontinue` is sufficient for power- or current-density analysis.

### 2.11.4 Trajectory output

The multiple-snapshot option must be selected to plot particle trajectories. The following commands can be used to produce the results as shown in Figure 2-43. Using GPTwin you can open the file `traj.gdf`, load template `traj.gdt` and the result should be identical.

```
gpt -o collector.gdf collector.in fieldmap/boundaries.in gdftrans -o traj.gdf collector.gdf time x y z G

```
Figure 2-43: Particle trajectories inside the collector. File `traj.gdf` plotted with template `traj.gdt`. For trajectory results, the combine-plot option must always be selected. As a result, the primary and secondary particles are always potted in the same graph.

### 2.11.5 Unrolled position

For power- and current-density calculations, only the `tcontinue` output statement is required and the `snapshot` keyword can be removed. This stores the 3D scatterstatistics in the outputfile. However, when this file is plotted directly, the results are not much illuminating, see Figure 2-44. For example the trajectory plot indicates that the vertical line at x=40 mm is caused by a z-dependence, but there simply is no reliable way to tell if the power density is lower or higher in that area from these plots.

Figure 2-44: Direct output of the scatter elements. File `collector.gdf`.with `tcontinue` keyword only. To overcome these problems, we define a coordinate d specifying the ‘unrolled’ position. This coordinate d runs along a collector plate and keeps measuring the distance along the edge. The unrolled coordinate for our single collector plate is listed in Table 2-B. Because d is monotonically increasing, following the distance of the plate, it is area preserving. As such, it is the most convenient parameter to plot along the horizontal axis for density plots. Table 2-B: Collector plate coordinates and corresponding unrolled position. z [mm] x [mm] d [mm]

The FISHFILE program can be used again to calculate this ‘unrolled position’ parameter:

```
fishfile -y 1 -o scatter.gdf fieldmap/collector.sf collector.gdf

```
The result of the above command is the file `scatter.gdf`, plotted in Figure 2-45. The vertical lines are completely gone as desired. A new problem is the fact that the scatter elements are able to generate fractions of the incoming particles to keep the statistics correct. In other words, not all dots in the plots represent an Particle trajectories z [mm] x [mm] scat_x [mm] -30 -20 -10 scat_y [mm] scat_z [mm] -30 -20 -10 scat_y [mm]

equal amount of particles. Therefore, it is essential to use the density-plot feature of GPTwin using weighted data.

Figure 2-45: Scatter statistics as function of unrolled position. File `scatter.gdf` plotted with template `scatter_d.gdt`.

### 2.11.6 Current- and power-density

Creating a density plot using GPTwin is straightforward: Select the density-plot option. Using this option is scientifically correct however can be a challenge. When not enough data is present, it is tempting to increase the blur, but this in turn makes everything Gaussian, independent on the actual distribution.

The important things to do when creating a density plot of power density are: • Select `scat_01E` in the weight_by box. This array represents the total `E`nergy for the collector plate `01`. • Weight by bin area • Set the scaling to manual. • Set the maximum Energy in the Max box. The ratio between energy and power is the simulation time `tlen`. Therefore, in our 1 ns simulation, an energy density of 1 W/m2 corresponds to a Max energy of 10–9.

When properly done, the scaling adapts itself to the number of bins, is independent on the number of particles in the simulation and follows the units along the x- and y-axes in the plot. When these are both mm, the scaling is to W/mm2, see Figure 2-46.

The total energy on the collector plate can be calculated using the statistics as Sum(scat_01E). Scaling to power can be done by dividing by `tlen` in the scale box.

Current density is completely analogous to power density, except that the `scat_01Q` array must be used. It represents the total charge `Q` for collector plate `01`.

Figure 2-46: Current and power density as function of position on collector plate. File `scatter.gdf` plotted with templates `scatter_Q.gdt` and `scatter_P.gdt` respectively. Unrolled position [mm] -20 -10 y [mm] Current density, red >
0.1 mA/mm^2 Sum(scat_01Q) =
1
4.1157 mA Unrolled position [mm] -20 -10 y [mm] Power density, red > 10 mW/mm^2 Sum(scat_01E) =
8.66366 W Unrolled position [mm] -20 -10 y [mm]

### 2.11.7 A Cylindrical symmetric collector

The GPT simulation of a cylindrical-symmetric cavity is analogous to the previous case. All required modifications are shown in Table 2-C. For a detailed explanation of the FISHFILE output, please see section 3.5. Table 2-C: Modifications required for a cylindrical-symmetric cavity.

Rectangular Cylindrical Description GPT Fieldmap

*[equation/table lost in PDF extraction — see UserManual.pdf §2.11]*
Cylindrical field map. FISHFILE options

- **`-y height`** — Don’t specify the height. Plot arrays (x,y) `scat_nnd`,

- **`scat_nny`** — `scat_nnd`,

- **`scat_nnphi`** — The angle in the xy-plane is typically plotted. Density scaling `scat_nnE`,

- **`scat_nnQ`** — `scat_nnEor`,

- **`scat_nnQor`** — For correct scaling, E/r and Q/r must be used.

### 2.11.8 Scanning a parameter

Practically any parameter can be scanned with the MR program. The typical use is running GDFA on the output of the FISHFILE program to directly obtain total current and power statistics per collector plate as function of the scanned parameter. The `scatterInn` and `scatterPnn` programs can be used to calculate plot total current and power for the first ten collector plates. For example, the following commands calculate current and power on the first collector plate as function of potential. The results are shown in Figure 2-47.

```
mr -v -o collector.gdf Efac.mr gpt collector.in fieldmap/boundaries.in
fishfile -y 1 -o scatter.gdf fieldmap/collector.sf collector.gdf
gdfa -o stats.gdf scatter.gdf Efac scatterI01 scatterP01

```
Figure 2-47: Total current and power on first collector plate as function of potential. File `avgs.gdf` plotted with templates `avgs_Q.gdt` and `avgs_P.gdt` respectively.

0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1 Efac [kV] scatterI01 [mA]
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1 Efac [kV] scatterP01 [W]
