## 2.1 Quadrupole focusing

In this section we will simulate a rectangular beam with Lorentz factor 𝛾=100 through two quadrupole lenses. The first quadrupole lens focuses the beam in the *y*-direction and defocuses the beam in the *x-*direction. The second quadrupole lens does just the opposite. The net result is a focusing force in both directions and the length and strength of both quadrupoles is chosen so that the beam is sent through a focus in both directions at z=1 meter.

Figure 2-1: Two quadrupole lenses can focus a beam in two directions: xz-plane (left) and yz-plane (right).

### 2.1.1 The GPT inputfile

The GPT inputfile needed to describe this simulation is listed in Listing 2-1. Like all inputfiles listed in the tutorial, it can be found at the location indicated in the corresponding caption.

**Listing 2-1:** GPT inputfile for beam focusing using a quadrupole doublet. Filename: `tutorial/quads/quads.in`

```
# GPT Tutorial: Quadrupole focusing

# Define beam parameters
gamma = 100 ;
radius= 6e-3 ;

# Start initial beam
setparticles("beam",100,me,qe,0.0) ;
setrxydist("beam","u",radius/2, radius) ;
setphidist("beam","u",0,2*pi) ;
setGdist("beam","u",gamma,0) ;

# Position the quadrupole lenses
quadrupole( "wcs","z",0.2, 0.1, 3.90 ) ;
quadrupole( "wcs","z",0.5, 0.2,-3.25 ) ;

# Specify output times
snapshot(0,4e-9,0.05e-9) ;

```
This sample GPT inputfile is described below line-by-line. The very first line in the sample GPT inputfile is ignored by the parser because it starts with a hash mark `#` indicating that the rest of the line is a comment. Comment-lines can appear anywhere in the GPT inputfile.

```
# GPT Tutorial: Quadrupole focusing

```
The first actual section in the GPT inputfile defines various parameters for later use.

```
# Define beam parameters
gamma = 100 ;
radius= 6e-3 ;

Line 4 defines the variable `gamma` to be equal to 100 and line 5 sets the `radius` to 6 mm. At this point, these variables don’t have any special meaning; they are just for user convenience. In lines 11 and 9, they are used to define the Lorentz factor of the beam and set the beam radius. User-defined variables can have any name, but can not start with a digit.

```
The second section starts the initial beam.

```
# Start initial beam
setparticles("beam",100,me,qe,0.0) ;
setrxydist("beam","u",radius/2, radius) ;
setphidist("beam","u",0,2*pi) ;
setGdist("beam","u",gamma,0) ;

```
The `setparticles` keyword, see section 4.2.1.1, is used to start 100 electrons in a particle set named `beam`. The predefined constants `me` and `qe` are set to the charge and mass of an electron. For other built-in constants we refer to Table 4-B on page 121. Because we will not include space charge in this simulation, the last parameter of `setparticles`, defining total charge, can be zero. After the particles are created, they are all positioned at the origin with zero velocity. The `setrxydist` keyword, see section 4.2.2.6, modifies the x-coordinates of the particles according to a specific distribution: Uniform (`"u"`) with center `radius/2` and width `radius`. The `setphidist` keyword, see section 4.2.2.7, sets a uniform angular distribution in the xy-plane over all angles. The combined effect of these two keywords is a disk-like beam, uniformly filled with particles in the xy-plane. Please note that the distribution of the x-coordinates as generated by `setrxydist` is far from uniform: It is linearly increasing with x such that after redistribution over all angles in the xy-plane the resulting beam is uniform. To produce an actual uniform distribution in x, the `setxdist` keyword can be used. The `setGdist` keyword, see section 4.2.3.8, gives all particles a Lorentz factor of `gamma`, previously defined as 100.

The third section positions the two quadrupole lenses. 13. `# Position the quadrupole lenses ` 14. `quadrupole( "wcs","z",0.2, 0.1, 3.90 ) ; ` 15. `quadrupole( "wcs","z",0.5, 0.2,-3.25 ) ; `

The first parameter of the `quadrupole` element, see section 4.6.10, is the ECS, the Element Coordinate System. The default coordinate system of a `quadrupole` positions the lens around the origin, oriented in the z-direction. The ECS lists the new 3D position and 3D orientation of the `quadrupole`, relative to its default. The ECS specification `"wcs","z",0.2`, instructs GPT to position the `quadrupole` relative to the Word Coordinate System (WCS), the default coordinate system, but moved
0.2 m downstream. The second `quadrupole` is moved
0.5 m downstream. Only the positions are affected, the orientation remains unchanged. For the simulation of complex experiments, it can be useful to define custom coordinate systems and position elements relative to those. We refer to section 1.4 for details about custom coordinate systems and element coordinate transformations. The following two parameters of the `quadrupole` lens are length and strength. The first quadrupole has a length of
0.1 m and a positive strength. The second lens needs to work opposite to the first lens to focus the beam in two planes. This could have been achieved by rotating the element 90° around its axis using the ECS, but specifying a negative strength has the same result and is much easier.

The fourth section defines when to write output. 17. `# Specify output times ` 18. `snapshot(0,4e-9,0.05e-9) `

The `snapshot` keyword, see section 4.3.11, is used to specify the times when output needs to be generated. The parameters are `from`, `to` and `step`, all measured in seconds. Output is written every 50 ps, between 0 and 4 ns.

### 2.1.2 The GPT batch file

Every GPT simulation contains not only a GPT run, but also includes subsequent data analysis. To automate this process, GPT simulations are typically run as a batch file containing various commands.

**Listing 2-2:** GPT batch file for beam focusing using a quadrupole doublet. Filename:

```
tutorial/quads/quads.bat
gpt -o result.gdf quads.in
gdftrans -o traj.gdf result.gdf time x y z
gdfa -o std.gdf result.gdf time stdx stdy avgz
gdf2a -o std.txt std.gdf

```
Listing 2-2 shows a sample batch file that could be used to run the quadrupole focusing example. It is briefly explained below as a short introduction to some of the capabilities of GPT. We refer to section 2.2 for a description how to actually run this example using GPTwin. Chapter 3 lists all possible data analysis and pre- and post-processing tools available in the GPT package. Linux users can run GPT and subsequent data- analysis tools using any command processor of their choice. Note that the GPT line needs a `GPTLICENSE=``xxx` specification for GPT to run properly.

```
gpt -o result.gdf quads.in [GPTlicense=xxx]
```
This line commands the actual GPT simulation. The set-up, simulation parameters and output method as described in the inputfile `quads.in` are now executed. The result is written to the file `result.gdf` as specified with the `–o` option. The outputfile contains all particle coordinates at the requested times or positions and can directly be plotted using GPTwin, see Figure 2-2. Using GPTwin, one can cycle through the plots to and inspect the results. As explained in the complete GPT syntax in section 1.2, an additional `–` `v` option is useful to track the progress of lengthy simulations.

Figure 2-2: Sample raw GPT output: Particle coordinates as function of simulation time.

```
gdftrans -o traj.gdf result.gdf time x y z
```
The GDTRANS program converts the raw GPT output from `result.gdf` to trajectory output written in the file `traj.gdf`. Again, the `–o` option is used to specify the name of the outputfile. This file contains a list of particle trajectories, as shown in Figure 2-3. The trajectories are plotted as function of `time`, and to reduce the size of the file, only the `x`, `y` and `z `coordinates of the trajectories are stored. When a parameter is scanned using the MR program, the trajectories can also be plotted as function of the scanned parameter. See section 3.17.for more information about the use of GDFTRANS.

Figure 2-3: GDFTRANS trajectory output.

```
gdfa -o std.gdf result.gdf time stdx stdy avgz
```
The raw GPT output and the trajectory output are typically studied to verify that the inputfile describing the simulation is correct. After this step, one may be interested in overall quantities like bunch-length, beam size and emittance. The GDFA program reads the GPT output from the file `result.gdf` and writes a new file named `std.gdf` containing various macroscopic quantities. In this case, the file `std.gdf` contains only the time=0 -10 -5 x [mm] -10 -5 y [mm] time=1e-009 -10 -5 x [mm] -10 -5 y [mm] time=2e-009 -10 -5 x [mm] -10 -5 y [mm] time=3e-009 -10 -5 x [mm] -10 -5 y [mm] time=3.35e-009 -10 -5 x [mm] -10 -5 y [mm] time=4e-009 -10 -5 x [mm] -10 -5 y [mm]
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1 z -10 -5 x [mm]
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1 z -10 -5 y [mm]

standard x- and y-deviations and the average longitudinal position all as a function of time, see Figure 2-4. As described in reference section 3.12, a very large number of data-analysis routines can be specified. It is even possible to create custom GDFA programs, as explained in the GPT Custom Elements documentation.

Figure 2-4: GDFA output: Standard deviation of x- and y-size as function of average longitudinal position.

```
gdf2a -o std.txt std.gdf
```
The last line in our batch file converts the file `std.gdf` to the ASCII file `std.txt` using the GDF2A program, see section 3.6. Because GDF files are written in a special binary format, only GPTwin and the GDF utility programs can open them. To be able to export GPT results to other programs, GDF files can be converted to ASCII using the GDF2A program. Part of the result is shown in Figure 2-5.

```
      stdx        stdy        avgz        time
 3.030e-003  2.966e-003  0.000e+000  0.000e+000
 3.030e-003  2.966e-003  1.499e-002  5.000e-011
 3.030e-003  2.966e-003  2.998e-002  1.000e-010
 3.030e-003  2.966e-003  4.497e-002  1.500e-010
 3.030e-003  2.966e-003  5.996e-002  2.000e-010
 3.030e-003  2.966e-003  7.494e-002  2.500e-010
 3.030e-003  2.966e-003  8.993e-002  3.000e-010
 3.030e-003  2.966e-003  1.049e-001  3.500e-010
```
 3.030e-003 2.966e-003 1.199e-001 4.000e-010
 3.030e-003 2.966e-003 1.349e-001 4.500e-010
3.030e-003 2.966e-003 1.499e-001 5.000e-010 Figure 2-5: Selected GDF2A output.
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1 avgz stdx [mm]
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1 avgz stdy [mm]
