## 2.2 The GPTwin user interface

GPTwin is the MS-Windows user interface for the GPT package: An easy-to-use environment that covers all aspects of a GPT simulation: • It provides an editor for the development of inputfiles and custom elements with on-line help. • It executes GPT and data-analysis tools, while logging diagnostic messages. • It plots and prints the simulation results in a variety of formats ranging from scatter to color-density- plots. • It fully automates the development of custom elements.

After installation, the GPTwin executable can be started using:

```
```

Start/Programs/General Particle Tracer/General Particle Tracer

```
GPT inpufiles can be opened by dragging and dropping the file into GPTwin or by selecting the Open command from the File menu. Please use any of these methods to open the files `quads.in` and `quads.bat` in the `tutorial` folder. The `tutorial` folder is typically located in a subfolder of `c:\program ` `files\general particle tracer`, but this may have been modified during installation.

After performing the above steps, the GPTwin user interface should look similar to Figure 2-6. The toolbar (with the buttons below the menu), element bar (shown on the left) and the status bar (below) can all be switched on or off using the View menu. You can use a pointing device or the Window menu to arrange the documents within GPTwin.

Figure 2-6: The GPTwin user interface with the files `quads.in` and `quads.bat`.

### 2.2.1 On-line help

On-line help can always be obtained by pressing the F1 key or selecting the Help menu. For example, when the cursor is located on a line containing the keyword `quadrupole `while F1 is pressed, a help screen as shown in Figure 2-7 is displayed. The buttons on the Help toolbar allow you to switch quickly between various help topics.

The GPTwin user interface

Figure 2-7: On-line help for a quadrupole lens.

### 2.2.2 Running the quadrupole example using GPTwin

The `quads.bat` batch file containing all commands to run the GPT simulation can be executed by selecting the file and clicking the button on the toolbar. Alternatively, File/Run can be specified on the menu or the CTRL+R key-combination can be pressed. After the run command is specified, simulation messages are shown in the bottom part of the `quads.bat` window, as shown in Figure 2-8. The simulation is completed when the Finished message appears. More or less space can be reserved for the simulation messages by moving the splitter. When no messages are shown at all, you can still move the splitter, which is in this case located at the bottom of the window. Every diagnostic message is followed by its date and time for your convenience.

```

Figure 2-8: Run window with messages. In this case, because there are no errors, only the commands themselves are shown. Otherwise, an error message will appear with the following format:

```
filename.in(linenumber): Errormessage
```
Double-clicking such an error opens the correct file and positions the cursor at the beginning of the line containing the error. Correct any errors and try again. Right-clicking in the messages section shows a pop- up menu with additional commands. It is for example possible to save all messages to an ASCII file for further analysis.

The button can be clicked to stop any running simulation. Using this feature may result in a corrupted and unusable outputfile.

### 2.2.3 Scatterplots

The raw output of GPT consists of all particle coordinates at the requested output times or positions. To inspect the simulation results using GPTwin, you can do the following: • Open the outputfile `quads.gdf` either by double-clicking on it, by dragging it into GPTwin or by using the Open command from the File menu and selecting `.gdf` files types. • You will now get a dialog-box asking you what you would like to see. To display xy-scatterplots at the various output times, select to plot variable `x` along the X-axis and `y` along the Y-axis. Press OK. • You can now cycle through the plots using the cursor keys (← and →) or using the previous and next plot buttons ( and ) on the toolbar. The output times are listed in the subtitle of all plots.

Figure 2-9: Plot settings for `quads.gdf` Because all plots are autoscaled individually, you can not see the beam going through a waist, except by studying the range of the axes. Furthermore, the units would be more convenient when given in [mm]. To solve these shortcomings, set the scaling to manual and chance the units, as shown in Figure 2-9. • To produce this settings dialog-box, double-click anywhere in the plot window or select the Settings command from the Plot menu. • Go to the sheet specifying the X-axis. The values plotted along the axis are `scale`**x*+`offset`. Set the scale to 1000 to convert from [m] to [mm]. When the axis scaling is changed, it is recommended to also change the axis label. Repeat for the Y-axis. • Select Manual scaling. Now you can enter the values for the minimum and the maximum. We suggest using -10 and 10. Repeat for the Y-axis.

Figure 2-10: `Result.gdf` plotted in GPTwin. “Aspect ratio” is selected to plot a cylindrical-symmetric beam as a circle instead of an ellipse. Now all plots have the same scale, as shown in Figure 2-10. When you cycle through the plots, you will clearly see the beamsize changing and going through a waist.

If you decide to rerun GPT with different inputfile parameters, you can update the selected plots either by pressing the Update button on the Toolbar, by pressing F5 or by selecting the Update command from the Plot menu. The plots shown are then based on the new data.

### 2.2.4 Statistics

For detailed data analysis, the GDFA program can be used as explained in section 3.12. However, sometimes it is more convenient to calculate simple statistics directly from the raw GPT data. Figure 2-11 shows the statistics dialog, obtained by double-clicking on the plot, calculating the average z-position of all particles. The result can be plotted in the window and is automatically updated.

The GPTwin user interface

Figure 2-11: Statistics dialog calculating and plotting the average z-position of all particles. The Plot check box must be checked to plot the selected statistic in the window after the dialog is closed. The scale and offset parameters are identical to those on the x- and y-axis dialogs. Selectable statistical functions are listed in Table 2-A. Statistics are always calculated over the complete data set. Therefore, cropping a plotted axis by selecting manual scaling does not affect the results. Table 2-A: GPTwin statistics functions Function Description

- **`Min`** — Minimum

- **`Max`** — Maximum

- **`Max-Min`** — Maximum-Minimum

- **`Avg`** — Average

- **`Std`** — Standard deviation

- **`Sum`** — Sum

- **`N`** — Number of particles

### 2.2.5 Trajectory output

Trajectory output is calculated in the batch file `quads.bat` from the raw GPT output by the GDFTRANS program:

```
gdftrans -o traj.gdf result.gdf time x y z

```
To display the results open the file `traj.gdf`, select z horizontally, x vertically and check the lineplot option on the General property page. Now the individual particle trajectories are shown one by one when cycling through the plots. Alternativelly, you can check the combine plot option, also on the General page, to plot all trajectories in the same window.

Instead of plotting the x-coordinate along the y-axis, it is also possible to select the y-coordinate along the y- axis. Use the New Window command in the Window menu to open a new window and plot a different projection. The result is shown in Figure 2-12. When the combine plot option is selected in neither of the plots, cycling through the individual trajectories in one plot will automatically show the corresponding trajectory in the other projection. When the GPT inputfile is modified and rerun, updating the plots with the Update button on the Toolbar will automatically update both windows.

Figure 2-12: Two different projections of all particle trajectories.

### 2.2.6 Extracting beam parameters

Most data analysis is done by the GDFA program, capable of calculating a large number of different beam parameters from the raw GPT output. In this section, we will create plots of the transverse standard deviations as function of longitudinal position

```
gdfa -o std.gdf quads.gdf time stdx stdy avgz

```
The parameters `stdx`, `stdy` and `avgz` are standard programs of GDFA calculating the following beam properties:

- **`stdx`** — Standard *x*-deviation of the particles: A measure for the beam size in the *x* direction.

- **`stdy`** — Standard *y*-deviation of the particles: A measure for the beam size in the *y* direction.

- **`avgz`** — Average *z*-coordinate of the particles: Beam position.

The variable `time` instructs GDFA to produce output so that the output contains the requested beam parameters at different times. The output is written to the file `std.gdf`, specified with the `–o` option. For a complete description of GDFA and the built-in programs, we refer to section 3.12.

To view `std.gdf` using GPTwin, you can do the following: • Open `std.gdf`. • Select Line plot, `avgz` on the horizontal axis and `stdx` on the vertical axis. Press OK. • To also see a plot of `stdy`, select the New window command from the Window menu. • Now select Line plot, `avgz` on the horizontal axis and `stdy` on the vertical axis. Press OK.

You will now see two windows showing different results from the same file, as shown in Figure 2-13.

Figure 2-13: Beam size as function of z. The waist in the *x*-direction is much more position dependent than the waist in the *y*-direction.

### 2.2.7 Templates

Having to set all plot options can be time consuming. As a convenience it is possible to save and load all plot settings using a template file. Template files always have extension `.gdt`. For example, when the file `traj.gdf` is first opened, loading the template `traj_y_z.gdt` immediately sets all options for a trajectory plot of *y* as function of *z*. In all tutorial sections, template files are present having a name in this format `filename_yaxis_xaxis.gdt`. When `filename.gdf` is opened with such a template, a `yaxis` as function of `xaxis` plot is immediately shown. The most convenient way to open a template is clicking the Load Template button in the lower-left corner of the plot-settings dialog box. Alternatively, the Load Template command in the Plot Menu can be used.

The plot settings of an existing plot can be saved with the Save template command in the Plot menu. A dialog box appears asking what settings to store. To (re)load plot settings from a template file, the (Re)Load template command in the Plot menu can be used. A dialog box appears asking what plot settings to overwrite. Using this mechanism, it is possible to create templates for the x-axis only, or restore only the x-axis from a complete template.

The GPTwin user interface

### 2.2.8 Printing and exporting graphics

Everything shown in a GPTwin window can be printed with the Print command in the File menu. The appropriate printer and paper size can be selected using Print setup in the File menu.

When many plots are present, we recommend increasing the number of horizontal and vertical plots in the General dialog of the plot settings. To see if the results are as expected you can use the print preview command in the File menu. This allows you to cycle through the various pages and zoom in and out.

Various important plot settings for printing graphics can be found in the Margins and Sizes property page of the plot settings, shown in Figure 2-14.

Figure 2-14: Various plot settings Both text and graphics can be copied to the clipboard using the Copy command in the Edit menu.

It is also possible to save a plot in a Windows Metafile or Enhanced Metafile format using Save As in the File menu. Such metafiles can be included by a variety of other programs like AutoCAD and TeX.
