## 2.3 Scanning the beam energy

This section continues with the example of the first section. Here the effect of the initial beam energy on the spot size at *z*=1 m is examined. The inputfile needed to examine this effect is shown in Listing 2-3 and can be found in the `tutorial/quadscan` folder. The corresponding batch file containing all the necessary commands, `quadscan.bat`, is explained below.

**Listing 2-3:** GPT inputfile to examine the effect of beam energy on spotsize:

```
tutorial/quadscan/quadscan.in
# GPT Tutorial: Scanning beam energy

# Start initial beam
setparticles("beam",100,me,qe,0.0) ;
setrxydist("beam","u",radius/2, radius) ;
setphidist("beam","u",0,2*pi) ;
setGdist("beam","u",gamma,0) ;

# Position the quadrupole lenses
quadrupole( "wcs","z",0.2, 0.1, 3.90 ) ;
quadrupole( "wcs","z",0.5, 0.2,-3.25 ) ;

# Specify output screen
screen( "wcs","I", 1.0 ) ;

```
The two differences with the previous inputfile are: A The beam parameters `gamma=100` and `radius=6e-3` statements are removed. This is needed because they are defined in a separate file, as we will see later in this section. B The `snapshot` statement is replaced with a `screen` statement. A screen interpolates the particle coordinates at a fixed plane in 3D space. Here the screen is positioned at *z*=1 m. For the reference of `screen`, see section 4.3.10.

Now that we have the inputfile, the next step is to scan the beam energy. To accomplish this, various values for gamma and radius could be specified on the GPT commandline as follows:

```
gpt -o res100.gdf quadbeam.in gamma=100 radius=6e-3
gpt -o res110.gdf quadbeam.in gamma=110 radius=6e-3
etc.

```
Although this works, having to analyze all the outputfiles is tedious. Therefore, it is recommended to use Multiple Run (MR) to perform the same job. It runs GPT with one or more varying or fixed parameters, just like the commandline approach, but it collects all output in one structured GDF file. For a complete description of MR we refer to section 3.18.

MR reads which parameter to set or scan from an additional file. For example to scan `gamma` over the range from 50 to 150 in steps of 5, and set the beam radius fixed at 6 mm we typically create a file named `scan.mr` containing the following lines:

```
gamma 50 150 5
radius 6e-3

```
The command to run GPT with `gamma` varying from 50 to 150 then is:

```
mr -v -o result.gdf scan.mr gpt quadbeam.in

```
After running the MR command, all the output is contained in the file `result.gdf`. We can use GDFA again to calculate the beam’s standard *x*- and standard *y-*deviation:

```
gdfa -o std.gdf result.gdf gamma stdx stdy

```
This time the `group_by` variable is `gamma`. This is because we want to make a plot where every point is calculated for a different `gamma`. As a rule of thumb, the `group_by` variable is usually the scanned parameter, `time` or `position`. The complete batch file is listed in Listing 2-4, where ASCII output of the result is generated using the GDF2A program.

**Listing 2-4:** Batch file for scanning the beam energy. Filename: `tutorial/quadscan/quadscan.bat `

```
mr -v -o result.gdf scan.mr gpt quadscan.in
gdfa -o std.gdf result.gdf gamma stdx stdy
gdf2a -o std.txt std.gdf

```
The result is shown in Figure 2-15. To reproduce these plots, open `std.gdf` in GPTwin with template `std_xgamma.gdt`, select New Window and open again with template `std_ygamma.gdt`.

Figure 2-15: Spot size as function of beam energy. The result shows that the effect of different beam energy on spot size is approximately equal in both planes.

In order to use the same GPT inputfile with and without MR, default values for variables can be defined in the GPT inputfile as shown below: `if( !defined(gamma) ) gamma=100 ; `If not defined gamma, then set gamma to 100. position=1 gamma stdx [mm] position=1 gamma stdy [mm]
