## 2.4 Automatic solving

There are two programs that can be used to instruct GPT to automatically find a set of variables for given objectives and constraints: GDFSOLVE and GDFMGO.

GDFMGO optimizes several conflicting objectives, without a-priori making a decision about the relative relevance. For example, in a beamline where total charge and pulse-duration are conflicting objectives, GDFMGO can make a scatterplot where the result is the trade-off between those objectives, and where each point is fully optimized in all variables. This is ideal for decision making and a great aid in understanding complex systems. The underlying genetic algorithm is extremely robust, but CPU intensive.

GDFSOLVE solves for multi-dimensional roots or one-dimensional objectives using more mathematical tools. It is the more analytic program that uses an estimated Hessian matrix for optimization problems, and the Jacobian for root-finding. It is therefore much faster than GDFMGO, but because it works with derivatives of the objective functions it also is more sensitive to numerical noise.

In this section an electron beam is sent through two quadrupole lenses and needs to be focused at z=1 m. Unlike the previous sections, the beam starts with a finite emittance to be able to make use of the Courant- Snyder GDFA routines. Furthermore, both time and position output is requested to simplify reproduction of the results shown below. Finally the tracking accuracy is increased to ensure stable results if small changes are made to the quadrupole strengths. The complete inputfile is shown in Listing 2-5 where the beam energy `gamma` and the strengths of the two quadrupoles `Q1` and `Q2` still need to be specified. All files can be found in the `tutorial/gdfsolve` folder.

**Listing 2-5:** GPT inputfile describing a beam through two quadrupole lenses with strengths Q1 and Q2. Both time and position output are requested. Filename: tutorial/gdfsolve/quads.in

```
# GPT Tutorial: GDFsolve

# A slightly higher accuracy is needed
accuracy(5)

# Real space of initial beam
radius = 6e-3 ;
setparticles("beam",100,me,qe,0.0) ;
setrxydist("beam","u",radius/2, radius) ;
setphidist("beam","u",0,2*pi) ;

# Phase space of initial beam
GBr = 10e-3 ;
setGBrxydist("beam","u",GBr/2,GBr) ;
setGBphidist("beam","u",0,2*pi) ;
setGdist("beam","u",gamma,0) ;

# Position the quadrupole lenses
quadrupole( "wcs","z",0.2, 0.1, Q1 ) ;
quadrupole( "wcs","z",0.5, 0.2, Q2 ) ;

# Specify output screen
snapshot(0,4e-9,0.05e-9) ;
screen( "wcs","I", 1.0 ) ;

```
Figure 2-16: Standard deviation of x- and y-size as function of longitudinal position for `gamma`=100. The initial guess for the quadrupole settings, `Q1`=3 and `Q2`=–3 [T/m], does not produce a minimum in both planes at z=1 m. Figure 2-16 shows the results for `gamma`=100 with an estimated `Q1`=3 and `Q2`=–3 [T/m]. The plots can be reproduced with the following commands and subsequently plotting the file `result.gdf`.

```
gpt -o quads.gdf quads.in gamma=100 Q1=3 Q2=-3
gdfa -o result.gdf quads.gdf time avgz stdx stdy

```
Clearly the beam is not sent through a minimum in the y-plane at z=1 m. The following sections describe how GDFSOLVE can be used to automatically adapt `Q1` and `Q2` such that a minimum is obtained in both planes.

### 2.4.1 Finding a minimum using GDFsolve

The GDFSOLVE program tries to satisfy multi-dimensional constraints and optimizes beam parameters by varying any number of GPT inputfile variables. This section demonstrates the use of GDFsolve by automatically finding the quadrupole settings of the previous sections. A description of the internal algorithms of GDFSOLVE can be found in sections 1.12.1 to 1.12.2 and more practical information can be found in reference section 3.14.

With some patience and a structured approach, it is possible to find quadrupole settings that produce a minimum in both planes at z=1 m. GDFsolve can do this automatically. The required inputfile for GDFsolve describing the free variables and beam parameters to minimize is shown in Listing 2-6.

**Listing 2-6:** Inputfile for GDFsolve requesting a minimum in x and y at z=1 m by varying `Q1` and `Q2`. Filename:

```
opti.sol
[VARIABLES]
Q1 = +3 ;
# Initial value
Q1.absdelta = 0.01 ;
# Absolute stepsize
Q1.min = 0 ; # Q1 must be positive

Q2 = -3 ;
# Initial value
Q2.absdelta = 0.01 ;
# Absolute stepsize
Q2.max = 0 ; # Q2 must be negative

```
[OPTIMIZE]
stdx = 0 ; # Approximate minimum in stdx
stdx.position = 1.0 ;

```
# At position z=1 m
stdx.abstol = 0.1e-3 ;

# Absolute tolerance
stdy = 0 ; # Approximate minimum in stdy
stdy.position = 1.0 ;

```
```
# At position z=1 m
stdy.abstol = 0.1e-3 ;

# Absolute tolerance

```
The variables `Q1` and `Q2` are defined in the `[VARIABLES]` section and start from 3 and –3 respectively. Both `Q1` and `Q2` have an absolute initial stepsize of
0.01 specified using `absdelta`. This stepsize is very important. A too small step immediately leads to a local minimum caused by simulation noise. A too large step prevents the algorithm from getting started at all because all steps seem to deviate further from the minimum. When GDFsolve does not work as expected the initial stepsize is the first thing to check. To guarantee that `Q1` and `Q2` have the correct sign, `min` and `max` statements are used.
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1 avgz stdx [mm]
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1 avgz stdy [mm]

The `[OPTIMIZE]` section describes one or more GDFA analysis routines to optimize. Both standard x and y deviation, `stdx` and `stdy`, must be as small as possible at a `position` of 1 m. A change in beam size below 0.1 mm, specified using `abstol`, is not significant. This tolerance is as important as the `absdelta` specification for a variable. A too high tolerance regards every solution as a minimum, while a too small tolerance instructs GDFsolve to find a minimum in the simulation noise.

Instead of running GPT directly, we now instruct GDFsolve to run GPT repeatedly to find the desired minimum. Because the beam energy `gamma` is not specified in the GPT inputfile, it must also be defined on the commandline. The output of GDFsolve corresponds to the best GPT run found and can, just like any other GPT run, be analyzed by GDFA. The correct instructions to run GDFsolve and analyze the results are shown in Listing 2-7. The plotted output of GDFA immediately shows a minimum in both the horizontal and vertical plane, see Figure 2-17. When compared to manually finding a simultaneous minimum in two variables, GDFsolve saves a lot of tedious work in this example.

**Listing 2-7:** Batch file to run GDFsolve and analyze the obtained minimum with GDFA. Filename: `opti.bat`.

```
gdfsolve -v -o quads.gdf opti.sol gpt quads.in gamma=100
gdfa -o result.gdf quads.gdf time avgz stdx stdy

```
Figure 2-17: Output of GDFsolve used as optimizer, analyzed with GDFA: A minimum in both the horizontal and vertical plane. Clearly GDFsolve is able to find the requested minimum by varying `Q1` and `Q2`. To know what settings of `Q1` and `Q2` correspond to the final minimum, the outputfile can be inspected using GDF2A. Alternatively, the verbose GDFsolve output can be examined. This output, shown when the `–v` option is specified, shows the progress of GDFsolve after each GPT run as shown in Figure 2-18. The first three columns specify the iteration number `N`, and the current settings for `Q1` and `Q2`. The following two columns specify the resulting `stdx` and `stdy`, where the number between parentheses is the scaled result obtained by dividing by the specified tolerance. The last column is the rms value, the square root of the sum of the squares of the scaled results. This rms column is the value that GDFsolve tries to minimize. As shown in Figure 2-18, GDFsolve works its way in 49 iterations from 3 and –3 for Q1 and Q2 to the final solution of 3.92 and –3.25 [T/m].

```
  N          Q1         Q2       stdx               stdy             rms
  1           3         -3  5.78e-005(   0.6)    0.00185(  18.5) (  19.1)
  2        3.01         -3  6.36e-005(   0.6)    0.00183(  18.3) (  18.9)
  3        3.03         -3   7.3e-005(   0.7)    0.00179(  17.9) (  18.7)
  4        4.63         -3    0.00107(  10.7)    0.00174(  17.4) (  28.1)
  5        3.64         -3   0.000445(   4.4)   0.000421(   4.2) (   8.7)
  6         3.7         -3    0.00048(   4.8)   0.000298(   3.0) (   7.8)
  7        4.05         -3   0.000706(   7.1)   0.000494(   4.9) (  12.0)
  8        3.78         -3   0.000535(   5.4)   0.000121(   1.2) (   6.6)
  9        3.89         -3   0.000596(   6.0)   0.000136(   1.4) (   7.3)
 10         3.8         -3   0.000545(   5.4)  9.12e-005(   0.9) (   6.4)
 11        3.82         -3   0.000554(   5.5)  7.25e-005(   0.7) (   6.3)
 12        3.84         -3    0.00057(   5.7)  7.32e-005(   0.7) (   6.4)
 13        3.83         -3    0.00056(   5.6)  6.74e-005(   0.7) (   6.3)
 14        3.82      -2.99    0.00058(   5.8)  6.95e-005(   0.7) (   6.5)
  .        .          .         .     .          .     .       .
  .        .          .         .     .          .     .       .
 43        3.92      -3.25  1.74e-005(   0.2)  6.97e-005(   0.7) (   0.9)
```
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1 avgz stdx [mm]
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1 avgz stdy [mm]

```
 44        3.94      -3.25  2.55e-005(   0.3)  8.26e-005(   0.8) (   1.1)
 45        3.92      -3.24  3.68e-005(   0.4)  7.01e-005(   0.7) (   1.1)
 46        3.92      -3.27  3.33e-005(   0.3)  7.12e-005(   0.7) (   1.0)
 47        3.93      -3.25  2.28e-005(   0.2)  7.61e-005(   0.8) (   1.0)
 48        3.91      -3.25  1.47e-005(   0.1)  7.86e-005(   0.8) (   0.9)
 49        3.92      -3.25  1.74e-005(   0.2)  6.97e-005(   0.7) (   0.9)
```
Figure 2-18: GDFsolve verbose output showing the progress from 3 and –3 for `Q1` and `Q2 `respectively to the final solution of 3.92 and –3.25 [T/m].

### 2.4.2 Solving for a waist

GDFsolve used as optimizer is a great tool, but 49 iterations for a relatively simple minimization could be a problem. Especially when we realize that when more variables are included the number of iterations often scales with N2. Your patience will be severely tested when each GPT run contains a non-trivial design including 3D spacecharge calculations. The solution is straightforward: Don’t use the optimizer unless you absolutely have to. In the above case, there is a very good alternative: The waist is not only defined by a minimum in `stdx` and `stdy`, but also as a zero in the Courant-Snyder α parameter. Minimizing `stdx` and `stdy` is equivalent to finding a zero in `CSalphax` and `CSalphay`. Such a root-finding procedure is typically much faster and often more reliable than minimizing a function. The required inputfile for GDFsolve is shown in Listing 2-8.

**Listing 2-8:** Inputfile for GDFsolve finding a simultaneous zero in `Csalphax` and `CSalphay` by varying `Q1` and `Q2`. Filename: `root.sol`

```
[VARIABLES]
Q1 = +4 ;
# Initial value
Q1.absdelta = 0.01 ;
# Absolute stepsize
Q1.min = 0 ; # Q1 must be positive

Q2 = -3 ;
# Initial value
Q2.absdelta = 0.01 ;
# Absolute stepsize
Q2.max = 0 ; # Q2 must be negative

```
[CONSTRAINTS]
CSalphax = 0 ;

```
# CSalphax must be zero
CSalphax.position = 1 ;

# At position z=1 m
CSalphax.abstol = 1 ;

# Absolute tolerance
CSalphay = 0 ;

```
```
# CSalphay must be zero
CSalphay.position = 1 ;

# At position z=1 m
CSalphay.abstol = 1 ;

# Absolute tolerance

```
The `[VARIABLES]` section is identical to Listing 2-6, specifying to vary `Q1` and `Q2`. The initial step used to calculate the derivative is specified with an `absdelta` of 0.01 and the correct sign is enforced using the `min` and `max` statements. To use GDFsolve as root finder, the `[OPTIMIZE]` section is replaced by a `[CONSTRAINTS]` section: `CSalphax` and `CSalphay` must both be zero at z=1 m. A solution is found when `CSalphax` and `CSalphay` are within `abstol`, in the rms sense, of the target value of zero. For a tolerance of unity, this reduces to a termination criterion of √`CSalphax`2 +` CSalphay`2 < 1. As shown in Listing 2-9 and Figure 2-19 running GDFsolve and the produced results are almost identical to the minimization case described in section 2.4.1.

**Listing 2-9:** Batch file to run GDFsolve and analyze the obtained minimum with GDFA. Filename: `root.bat`.

```
gdfsolve -v -o quads.gdf root.sol gpt quads.in gamma=100
gdfa -o result.gdf quads.gdf time avgz stdx stdy

```
Figure 2-19: Output of GDFsolve used as root-finder, analyzed with GDFA: A minimum in both the horizontal and vertical plane. The length of the verbose output shown in Figure 2-20 shows the big advantage of the root-finder approach. It takes only 5, compared to 49, attempts to get `Q1` and `Q2` to 3.93 and –3.26. This is plus or minus the specified `absdelta`, with about an order of magnitude improvement in CPU time. The reason for this improvent is a completely different algorithm for the root finder. The first function evaluation is identical, but then the Jacobian matrix is estimated by varying each variable an amount of `absdelta`. These lines are indicated by a `J`, and only the difference with the previous run is shown. After the first three runs, a matrix- inversion in GDFsolve yields the first new attempt shown in run number four. A small correction to the Jacobian is then applied and the fifth estimate is already on target.

```
  N          Q1         Q2   CSalphax           CSalphay             rms
  1           4         -3       40.5(  40.5)      -7.22(  -7.2) (  41.2)
  2J       0.01                 0.364(   0.4)     -0.502(  -0.5)
  3J                  0.01       1.41(   1.4)     -0.198(  -0.2)
  4        3.97      -3.28      -2.22(  -2.2)      -1.32(  -1.3) (   2.6)
  5        3.93      -3.26      0.444(   0.4)     -0.442(  -0.4) (   0.6)
```
Figure 2-20: GDFsolve verbose output showing the progress from 4 and –3 for `Q1` and `Q2 `respectively to the final solution of 3.93 and –3.26 [T/m]. Is it really that simple to change from minimization to root-finding? Unfortunately, no. Root-finding is fundamentally different from optimization, and typically new (undesired) solutions are introduced. With good initial estimates this provides no problem, but when we start Q1 and Q2 for example from +2 and –2 the results as shown in Figure 2-21 are produced: A collimated beam in the y-plane also produces a zero `CSalphay`, but this was not what we were looking for.

Figure 2-21: Undesired solution for `Q1` and `Q2` starting from an initial estimate of +2 and –2 respectively.

### 2.4.3 Scanning GDFSOLVE using MR

Scanning a GDFsolve command using MR allows you to calculate optimal variable values as function of any other variable. It is not the typical thing to do as a novice GPT user. To explain the procedure, the previous example of section 2.4.2 is continued while scanning the beam energy `gamma` using MR.
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1 avgz stdx [mm]
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1 avgz stdy [mm]
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1 avgz stdx [mm]
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1 avgz stdy [mm]

**Listing 2-10:** While MR scans the beam energy `gamma`, GDFsolve is used to find the optimal settings for `Q1` and `Q2`. Filename: `scan.bat`

```
mr -v -o quads.gdf gamma.mr gdfsolve root.sol gpt quads.in
gdfa -o result.gdf quads.gdf time avgz stdx stdy
gdfa -o Q12.gdf quads.gdf gamma Q1 Q2
```
where the file `gamma.mr` contains the following line:

```
gamma 90 110 5

```
As shown in Listing 2-10 the first line of the batch file runs MR with `gamma` varying from 90 to 110 as described in the file `gamma.mr`. Instead of directly running GPT with the `quads.in` file, GDFsolve is used to find the corresponding waist described in the `root.sol` file with identical constraints as described in section 2.4.2. The output of all this, `quads.gdf`, contains the best results for every `gamma`. Here we go one step further: Plotting the optimal `Q1` and `Q2` as function of `gamma`. The values for `Q1` and `Q2` are written in the outputfile which can be inspected using GDF2A:

```
gdf2a –o result.txt result.gdf

```
In order to plot the results using GPTwin, two short custom GDFA programs need to be written:

```
int Q1_func( double *result ) { return( gdfmgetval( "Q1", result ) ) ; }
int Q2_func( double *result ) { return( gdfmgetval( "Q2", result ) ) ; }

```
The procedure how to add these functions is explained in the GPT Custom Elements documentation. After these programs have been added, the last GDFA line calculates `Q1` and `Q2` as function of `gamma` in the file `Q12.gdf`. The result is a perfectly linear correspondence, as shown in Figure 2-22.

Figure 2-22: Optimum values for `Q1` and `Q2` as function of `gamma`.

### 2.4.4 Multi-objective: GDFMGO

We continue here with the same example of focusing a beam with two quadrupoles, but now as a multi- objective problem. Our two objectives are to minimize stdx *and* stdy, in order to see how one depends on the other. In other words, we want to know how much bigger stdy becomes if we try to further reduce stdx. Such multi-objective optimization is the realm of GDFMGO, and the inputfile to accomplish this is given in Listing 2-11. gamma
3.6
3.8
4.0
4.2
4.4 Q1 gamma -
3.6 -
3.4 -
3.2 -
3.0 -
2.8 Q2

**Listing 2-11:** Inputfile for GDFMGO to optimize for both `stdx` and `stdy`. Filename: `opti.mgo`

```
[OPTIONS]
populationsize=200 ;
# To make nice plots, not really needed

[VARIABLES]
Q1.min = 0 ;

# Q1 must be between
Q1.max = 10 ;

# 0 and 10

Q2.min = -10 ;

# Q2 must be between
Q2.max = 0 ; # -10 and 0
```

[OPTIMIZE]
stdx.position = 1.0 ;

```
# We look at z=1 m
stdx.max = 0.002 ;

# Beam must be smaller than 2 mm
stdy.position = 1.0 ;

```
```
# Idem for stdy
stdy.max = 0.002 ;

#

When using GDFMGO it is not needed, or even possible, to specify deltas and tolerances for the variables and objectives. Here the population size is overwritten to 200 to make nicer plots. The default values work pretty well in most cases. Furthermore, to make the example more interesting, we changed the initial zero energy spread and created `quadsmgo.in`: 16. `setGdist("beam","u",gamma,gamma/5) ; `

```
Now we are ready to run GPT via GDFMGO to automatically get the trade-off between `stdx` and `stdy`:

```
gdfmgo –v –o quads.gdf opti.mgo gpt –j 1 quadsmgo.in gamma=100

```
The results can be plotted from `quads.gdf` with templates `stdxy.gdt` and `q1q2.gdt`. To illustrate the genetic algorithm, the 1st, 5th, 10th and final generations are shown in Figure 2-23. The code starts by randomly filling variable space for `Q1` and `Q2`, based on the min and max values for the variables `Q1` and `Q2`. The simulation results for `stdx` and `stdy` are subsequently ranked and only the best ones are candidates for further attempts. The ranking is shown as color coding in the plots, ranging from blue (good) to red (worse). The initial attempt seems hopeless, but already after 5 generations significant progress is observable: Quite a few results are below the 2 mm threshold as set in the `mgo` file, and the area in variable space is significantly reduced. At the 10th iteration, the Pareto front is already reached with very good approximation, see the dark blue datapoints. The sampling however is rather poor because too many points are still too far out, so the optimizer continues. At the final generation, number 31 in this case, the desired result is reached. It can be seen that above approximately 0.3 mm you can reduce both `stdx` and `stdy`, but if you want to reduce either below that value, you pay a big price in the other dimension.

Note that the large area in variable space for `Q1` and `Q2` has fully collapsed to a parametric line. The meaning of this line is that if you want a small `stdx` and a small `stdy`, you only have to consider combinations of `Q1` and `Q2` that lie on this line. The initial 2D problem has hereby collapsed into a 1D problem. The final dimensionality is always the number of objectives minus one, regardless of the number of variables. This spectacular reduction of dimensionality is an intrinsic feature of the multi-objective approach, and this makes it such a useful tool for decision making.

Figure 2-23: Evolution towards minimum values for both `stdx` and `stdy` automatically obtained with GDFMGO. Especially in the early stages of optimization, GDFMGO might run GPT with parameters very far off realistic settings. This can result in a significant waste of CPU time because unrealistic settings tend to consume relatively large amounts of computational power. It is therefore recommended to always add `setrlimit("CPU",N,M)` to the GPT inputfile, especially when running on large clusters. This instructs GPT to finish the timestep and abort a run softly after N seconds CPU time, while enforcing a hard-limit of M seconds. generation=1
0.2
0.5 GPT stdx [mm]
0.2
0.5 stdy [mm] generation=1 GPT Q1 -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 Q2 generation=5
0.2
0.5 GPT stdx [mm]
0.2
0.5 stdy [mm] generation=5 GPT Q1 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 Q2 generation=10
0.5 GPT stdx [mm]
0.5 stdy [mm] generation=10
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5 GPT Q1 -
3.6 -
3.4 -
3.2 -
3.0 -
2.8 -
2.6 -
2.4 Q2 generation=31
0.5 GPT stdx [mm]
0.5 stdy [mm] generation=31
3.0
3.2
3.4
3.6
3.8 GPT Q1 -
3.2 -
3.0 -
2.8 -
2.6 -
2.4 Q2
