## 2.6 Accuracy

The quality of the numerical results as produced by GPT depends mainly on the following two factors: • The number of particles in the simulation • The specified `accuracy`

Increasing the number of macro-particles in a simulation generally gives a more accurate result, especially for macroscopic quantities. For large numbers of particles the accuracy generally increases with the square root of the number of particles. The needed CPU time however increases at least linear with the number of particles. Therefore using more particles than necessary is not recommended.

Using `accuracy` the number of significant digits in the individual particle coordinates can be specified to the GPT kernel. We refer to section 1.8 for a detailed description of the Runge-Kutta dynamic stepsize algorithm and section 4.3.2 for the `accuracy` reference.

Consider for example the set-up of the previous section: A single particle accelerated over 1 meter in a homogeneous electric field with *E*=1 MV/m. Listing 2-13 contains the corresponding GPT inputfile where output is generated by a screen at z=2 m. The calculation accuracy is a variable named `acc`.

**Listing 2-13:** GPT inputfile for electrostatic accelerator producing output z=2 meter with variable accuracy:

```
tutorial/accuracy/accuracy.in
# GPT Tutorial: Accuracy of the electrostatic accelerator

# Accuracy to be used
accuracy( acc ) ;

# Homogeneous E-field
erect( "wcs", "z",1/2, 1,1,1, -1e6 ) ;

# Position particle at origin with zero velocity
setstartpar("beam", 0,0,0, 0,0,0 ) ;

# Output at z=2 m
screen( "wcs","I", 2 ) ;

```
The analytical expression for γ when *z*>1 m is: γ𝑧>1 = 1 + 𝐸kin 𝐸0 ⁄ [2.2] where *E*kin=*qE* and *E*0=*mc*2. For 1 MV/m this yields: γ ≈2.956935103.

An example of using this inputfile, see `acc5.bat`, with an accuracy of 5 is:

```
gpt -o acc5.gdf accuracy.in acc=5
gdf2a -w 16 acc5.gdf
```
The `-w 16` option specifies a larger column width to print more significant digits. The result is: γ =2.956703025

Using MR a complete scan can be made:

```
mr -v -o result.gdf accuracy.mr gpt accuracy.in
gdfa -o acc.gdf result.gdf acc avgG tutacc numderivs

```
Where the file `accuracy.mr` contains the following line:

```
acc 4 10 0.05

```
This scans the variable `acc` from 4 to 10 in steps of 0.05. The Lorentz factor γ is then grouped by `acc` using GDFA. The number of significant digits and required CPU time as function of `acc` are shown in Figure 2-26. To plot the result with GDFA, we use a custom program to calculate the number of significant digits *d*: 𝑑= −log 10((γ −γref) γref ⁄ ) [2.3] We refer to the GPT Custom Elements documentation for a description of custom GDFA programs.

Figure 2-26: Number of significant digits in γ (left) and the number of timesteps in the Runge-Kutta algorithm (right) as function of the specified `accuracy`. For almost all beamline simulations, the default accuracy setting of GPT of 4 is sufficient. However, high- accuracy, single-particle simulations sometimes require a higher accuracy setting, typically in the range between 6 and 8. acc Significant digits acc numderivs
