## 2.7 Magnetic mirror

As a demonstration of the high accuracy achievable with GPT a magnetic mirror is simulated. A magnetic field gradient reflects a charged particle gyrating around the magnetic field lines. The following set up is used to demonstrate this effect: A particle starts at 𝑧= −1 m with initial velocity β=0.01 making an angle θ with the z-axis in the xz-plane. The *y-*coordinate of the particle is chosen to be the Larmor radius, causing the particle to rotate precisely around the z-axis. The field gradient is generated by a solenoid located at *z*=0 with a radius of 20 cm and 100 loops of 100 A.

The loss cone, the angles θ for which the particle is not reflected by the gradient, is given by [3]: sin2(θ) < 𝐁0 𝐁𝑚 [2.4] where **B**o and **B**m are the initial and maximum magnetic field strengths respectively. The expression yields θ=4.98 in our case. The inputfile used to perform the simulations is given in Listing 2-14.

**Listing 2-14:** GPT inputfile for a magnetic mirror: `tutorial/magmir/magmir.in`.

```
# GPT Tutorial: Magnetic mirror demonstration

# Ultra-high accuracy for best results
accuracy(8) ;

# Define beam parameters
GBeta=0.01 ;                     # Initial norm. momentum
GBetax=GBeta*sin(theta/deg) ;    # Norm. Momentum in x-direction
GBetaz=GBeta*cos(theta/deg) ;    # Norm. Momentum in z-direction
Bini=2.36968e-4 ; # Initial B field (at z=-1)
Rl=m*c*GBetax/(q*Bini) ; # Larmor radius

# Start the particle
setstartpar( "beam", 0,Rl,-1, GBetax,0,GBetaz ) ;

# Position the solenoid
solenoid( "wcs", "I", 0.2,10000 ) ;

# Time output for trajectories and theta-scan
snapshot( 0,0.7e-6,0.5e-9) ;
# snapshot( 1e-6 ) ;

```
Mathematical functions like `sin`, `cos`, `tan` and `sqrt` can be used in a GPT inputfile like in normal computer code. The operator precedence is similar to C, with the exception of the exponential operator `^`, not present in C, having the highest precedence. For a complete list of operators and built-in functions, we refer to Table 4-A and Table 4-C on page 120.

We will first examine the following two cases: θ=4.75° and θ=5.25°. In the first case the particle is expected to be lost, in the second case it is expected to be reflected. The results shown in Figure 2-27 were generated by performing the following commands and plotting the trajectory results:

```
gpt -o t475.gdf magmir.in theta=4.75
gdftrans -o traj475.gdf t475.gdf time x y z Bz
gpt -o t525.gdf magmir.in theta=5.25
gdftrans -o traj525.gdf t525.gdf time x y z Bz

```

Figure 2-27: Particle trajectory when θ=4.75° (left) and θ=5.25° (right). It is clear that in both cases the Larmor radius of the particle decreases because of the increasing magnetic field strength. The particle trajectory remains centered around the z-axis. When θ=4.75° the velocity remains positive and the particle is lost. When θ=5.25° the velocity changes sign and the particle is reflected.

Now we will verify **Error! Reference source not found.** by scanning θ using MR. The following MR file c an be used to scan θ from 0° to 10°, using ten times more steps in the interval 4°< θ <6°. To reduce the size of the outputfile, only one snapshot at 1 μs is needed.

**Listing 2-15:** `theta.mr`

```
theta 0  3 1
theta 4  6 0.1
theta 6 10 1

```
To plot the z-coordinate as function of theta the following commands have to be specified. Before running, please make sure that only snapshot output at 1 μs is specified.

```
mr -v -o result.gdf theta.mr gpt magmir.in
gdfa -o magmir.gdf result.gdf theta avgx avgy avgz avgBx avgBy avgBz

```
Figure 2-28: Final particle position as function of angle of incidence. The result, Figure 2-28, indicating for which value of θ the particle is lost, is close to the analytical value: θ=4.98. A larger final time or screen output and more points around θ=5° can be used to calculate the simulation’s loss cone with more accuracy. It yields approximately 4.96 and is left as an exercise. -
1.0 -
0.8 -
0.6 -
0.4 -
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4 z -2 x [mm] -
1.0 -
0.8 -
0.6 -
0.4 -
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4 z -4 -2 x [mm] -
1.0 -
0.8 -
0.6 -
0.4 -
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4 z
0.003
0.004
0.005
0.006
0.007
0.008
0.009 Bz -
1.0 -
0.8 -
0.6 -
0.4 -
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4 z -
0.005
0.000
0.005 Bz time=1e-006 theta -2 -1 avgz
