## 2.8 Element Coordinate System

All GPT elements, both standard and custom, can be positioned anywhere in 3D space with any orientation. This can be very useful when simulating misaligned or rotated beamline components. GPT uses orientation vectors to position elements and their working will be explained in this section. The use of these vectors is the same for all elements.

As an example we will use two current loops placed vertically above and below the beampath, as shown in Figure 2-29. Together these loops produce a vertical field which bends an electron beam in the horizontal plane. To model the current loops we have chosen to use the `solenoid` element because it has its magnetic field defined over all space, not only close the z-axis. For a reference of the element `solenoid` see section 4.6.15.

Figure 2-29: Schematic picture of the current loops and the generated field lines. When using the standard orientation of a solenoid, it is positioned perpendicular to the beam path with the beam going through its center, as shown in Figure 2-30. This is the orientation of a standard focusing coil. As we have seen in previous sections, such a solenoid can be placed using the following syntax:

```
solenoid("wcs","z",1, R, I) ;
```
This places a solenoid at a distance of 1 m from the origin in the z-direction.

Figure 2-30: Standard orientation of a solenoid. Because of the 3D capabilities of the GPT kernel, the standard solenoid can still be used to simulate our steering coils. The coils can be positioned off axis and facing a different direction by specifying an element coordinate transform (ECS) in the inputfile. More information about GPT coordinate systems can be found in sections 1.1 and 1.4.3.

First we rotate the solenoid around its origin by specifying its new orientation vectors. The new orientation is shown in Figure 2-31. The solenoid has been rotated 90 around its x-axis.

Figure 2-31: Orientation of a solenoid rotated 90 around its x-axis. The complete syntax line for such a solenoid is:

```
solenoid("wcs", 0,0,1, 1,0,0, 0,0,-1, R, I) ;

```

The first parameter specifies the coordinate system relative to which the subsequent coordinates are given. In our case this is `"wcs"`. Then follow three sets of x-,y-,z-coordinates specifying the position and orientation of the element.

The first coordinate set gives the position of the element in x-, y-, z-coordinates. The specified distances are in meters and relative to the coordinate system specified as the first parameter. In our example the center of the solenoid is placed at a distance of 1 m from the origin of `"wcs"` in the z-direction. It is not moved in the x- or y-direction. This translation is specified as `0,0,1`.

The second coordinate set specifies the direction of the new x-direction using directional cosines. The first parameter determines how much of the new x-vector lies in the direction of the x-axis of the reference coordinate system. The reference coordinate system is specified by the first parameter of the syntax line, in our case it is `"wcs"`. The second parameter determines how much of the new unit x-vector lies in the direction of the y-axis of the reference coordinate system. And the third parameter determines how much of the new unit x-vector lies in the direction of the z-axis of the reference coordinate system. In our case the direction of the x-axis has not changed, because the solenoid has been rotated round its x-axis. Therefore we specify a unity transformation in the x-direction `1,0,0`.

The third coordinate set specifies the direction of the new unit y-vector the same way as we did for the new x-direction. The components of the new directions are given relative to the standard unit vectors. In our example the new direction of unit vector y is opposite to the `"wcs"` z-direction. This is specified as `0,0,-1`.

The new z-direction is calculated by the GPT kernel and does not have to be specified: 𝑧̂ = 𝑥̂ × 𝑦̂. The kernel also handles all normalizations.

Finally the reoriented solenoid has to be positioned above the beampath, as shown in Figure 2-32. This means that it has to be moved in the y-direction of the WCS coordinate system. To move the solenoid 5 cm in this direction should be specified as the translation `0,0.05,1`.

Figure 2-32: Solenoid with a new orientation positioned above the beampath. The complete syntax line now becomes:

```
solenoid("wcs", 0,0.05,1, 1,0,0, 0,0,-1, R, I) ;

```
A second solenoid is placed 5 cm below the beampath with the same orientation. The corresponding inputfile is shown in Listing 2-16.

**Listing 2-16:** GPT inputfile demonstrating a non-trivial ECS: `tutorial/ecs/ecs.in`

```
# GPT Tutorial: Bending particles using two current loops

# Define particle parameters
gamma = 10 ;
betaz = sqrt(1-gamma^-2) ;
vz    = c*betaz ;

# Start particles
setstartpar( "beam", -.2e-3,0,0, 0,0,gamma*betaz ) ;
setstartpar( "beam", .0e-3,0,0, 0,0,gamma*betaz ) ;
setstartpar( "beam", +.2e-3,0,0, 0,0,gamma*betaz ) ;

# Position the solenoids
solenoid( "wcs", 0, 0.05,1, 1,0,0, 0,0,-1, 0.1, 100 ) ;
solenoid( "wcs", 0,-0.05,1, 1,0,0, 0,0,-1, 0.1, 100 ) ;

# Specify output times
snapshot( 0,1.5/vz,0.05/vz ) ;

```
Now the two solenoids are placed above and below the beampath in their new orientation. To view the trajectory of the particle run the batch file: `tutorial/ecs/ecs.bat`. It contains the command to run GPT with inputfile `ecs.in` and outputfile `result.gdf`: Then the trajectories are calculated with the GDFTRANS program and written to `traj.gdf`.

```
gpt -o result.gdf ecs.in
gdftrans -o traj.gdf result.gdf time x y z

```
The particle trajectories can be shown by plotting the z-position horizontally and the x-position vertically, as shown in Figure 2-33.

Figure 2-33: Particle trajectories through the steering coils, plotted using GPTwin. We see in Figure 2-33 that the beam is bent in the positive x-direction due to the solenoid field. Please note that outside the coils there is a small magnetic field with opposite direction, causing a small deflection in the negative x-direction.

For macroscopic beam investigation, we can also use the GDFA program:

```
gdfa -o avg.gdf result.gdf time avgx avgy avgz
```
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4 z [m] x [mm]
