## 2.9 Initial particle distribution

In this example, we will start a 1 MeV electron beam with a total charge of 100 pC. The position, momentum and energy distributions are all Gaussian, but this can easily be modified to uniform, linear or quadratic distributions when required. Such a beam can be specified in a number of well-defined steps: Step Plane(s) Elements used Specifying the particle set

- **`setparticles`** — Specifying the real-space distribution functions xyz `setzdist`, `setxdist`, `setydist`, `setrxydist`, `setphidist` Specifying the phase-space distribution functions xβx, yβy `setGBxdist`, `setGBydist` Scale emittances xβx, yβy `setGBxemittance`, `setGByemittance` Specifying the energy-distribution function γ (Energy)

- **`setGdist`** — Specifying divergence angles xβx, yβy `addxdiv`, `addydiv`

The files for this tutorial section are located in the folder `gpt/tutorial/cylbeam`. A `snapshot(0)` statement is used to inspect the initial particle distribution at *t*=0. In other words, a `snapshot(0)` statement writes the particle distribution to the outputfile exactly as it starts.

To start the particles in our sample 1 MeV electron beam, we first define a particle set named `"beam"`, containing 1000 particles having a total charge of 100 pC. The `setparticles` element is described in section 4.2.1.1. The built-in constants `me` and `qe` represent the mass and charge of an electron respectively.

```
nps  = 1000 ;
# Start 1000 particles
Qtot = -100e-12 ;
# Total charge 100 pC
setparticles( "beam", nps, me, qe, Qtot ) ;

```
To give these particles a Gaussian longitudinal distribution centered around *z*=0 we use the `setzdist` element, see section 4.2.2.5. The typical length is specified as 4 mm and the distribution is extended to 3 sigma in both directions. In this case the distribution specification is: `"g",0,4e-3,3,3`. The resulting longitudinal distribution is shown in Figure 2-34.

```
zlen   = 0.004 ;
# Buch length: 4 [mm]
radius = 0.002 ;
# Bunch radius: 2 [mm]
setzdist( "beam", "g", 0,zlen, 3,3 ) ;

```
Figure 2-34: Longitudinal particle distribution obtained using GDF2HIS, see section 3.9. It is quite simple to specify other distributions. For example a uniform distribution centered around z=1 mm could be specified by: `"u",1e-3,4e-3`. Please see section 1.6.1 or Table 1-C on page 19 for a description of all possible distribution specifications.

The elements `setxdist` and `setydist` are used in a similar way as `setzdist`. In this example, the radial distribution of the particles is Gaussian in *r* and specified using `setrxydist`, see section 4.2.2.6. For radial distributions it is important to never generate negative radii. Therefore, the left tail of the Gaussian distribution is set to 0 sigma. For a uniform distribution, the distribution parameters of `setrxydist` must always be: `"u",rmax/2,rmax`. The `setrxydist` element only modifies the x-coordinates of the particles, assuming a rotational symmetric distribution in the xy-plane. Therefore, `setphidist`, see section 4.2.2.7, must be used to specify a uniform φ distribution over 2π in the xy-plane. The resulting distribution is shown in Figure 2-35. -12 -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 z [mm] Particle count

```
setrxydist( "beam", "g", 0, radius, 0,3 ) ;
setphidist( "beam", "u", 0, 2*pi ) ;

```
Figure 2-35: Beam distribution in xy-plane scatterplot (left) and density plot (right). The density plot is created with 10 times more particles. As an alternative to `setrxydist` and `setphidist` the elements `setxdist` and `setydist` can be used to specify the distribution in the xy-plane. Therefore, it is very important to understand the difference between `setrxydist` and `setxdist`. Both elements set the *x*-coordinates of the particles to a specified distribution. However, a uniform distribution for `setxdist` sets the *x*-coordinates of all particles uniform in the x-plane only. A uniform distribution for `setrxydist` results in a uniform distribution in the xy-plane when a uniform `setphidist` is also used. To accomplish this, `setrxydist` adds relatively more particles at larger radii because the amount of ‘space’ on a circle grows linear with *r*.

The phase-space distribution is set using `setGBxdist` and `setGBydist`, see section 4.2.3.1 and 4.2.3.3 respectively. We use a Gaussian distribution centered around zero with a standard deviation of 1e-3, cut-off at three sigma. Please note that by specifying these distributions, we implicitly specify the transverse emittances. However, we don’t need to worry about this too much, because the emittances can be fine-tuned later. Also the divergence angles are specified separately. Important in this step is only the type of distribution, e.g. Gaussian or uniform.

```
setGBxdist( "beam", "g", 0, 1e-3, 3,3 ) ;
setGBydist( "beam", "g", 0, 1e-3, 3,3 ) ;
The transverse emittances are set using `setGBxemittance` and `setGByemittance`, see sections 4.2.3.9 and 4.2.3.10 respectively. These elements scale the transverse momentum coordinates linearly till the specified emittance is reached. In this example, the emittance is set to 5π mm-mrad. Running the GDFA programs `nemixrms` and `nemiyrms` will result in emittance values of 5π mm-mrad, independent on the average beam energy and divergence angles specified later. 11. `setGBxemittance( "beam", 5e-6 ) ; ` 12. `setGByemittance( "beam", 5e-6 ) ; `

Now we can specify the beam energy distribution using `setGdist`. In this example, an average energy of 1 MeV and a uniform energy spread of 1% are used. The Lorentz factor is calculated from the average beam energy. The result is shown in Figure 2-36. 13. `Eo = 1e6 ; `

```
```
# Average beam energy: 1 [MeV]
G   = 1-q*Eo/(m*c*c) ;

# Corresponding gamma
dG  = (G-1)/100 ;

# 1% Energy spread
setGdist( "beam", "u", G, dG ) ;
```

-6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 x [mm] -6 -4 -2 y [mm] -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 x [mm] -6 -4 -2 y [mm]

Figure 2-36: Correlation between longitudinal position and beam energy. The interference pattern is an artifact of the Hammersley sequence. The `addzdiv` element rotates this plot. Optionally, the transverse phase-space divergence angles can be specified using `addxdiv` and `addydiv`, see section 4.2.4.1 and
4.2.4.3 respectively. When written as a separate element, it is not possible to include the beam radius in the divergence calculations because the beam radius is differently defined for a uniform and a Gaussian transverse distribution. Therefore, the divergence must always be specified in [rad/m]. To create a beam with a radius of 2 mm and a divergence angle of
0.1 rad, a divergence of 50 rad/m must be specified. In this example, a divergence of 1 rad/m is used, defocusing in the *x*-plane and focusing in the *y*-plane. The result is shown in Figure 2-37. 17. `addxdiv( "beam", 0, 1 ) ; ` 18. `addydiv( "beam", 0, -1 ) ; `

Figure 2-37: Transverse phase-space plots. The vertical axis is the transverse velocity, normalized by the speed of light. time=0 -10 -5 z [mm]
0.994
0.996
0.998
1.000
1.002
1.004
1.006 Energy [MeV] -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 GPT x [mm] -
0.006 -
0.004 -
0.002
0.000
0.002
0.004
0.006 Bx -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 GPT y -
0.006 -
0.004 -
0.002
0.000
0.002
0.004
0.006 By
