# Elements, Beamlines and Sequences
## Definition of Elements

### Element Input Format

All physical elements are defined by statements of the form

> 

where

is a name to be given to the element.

is an element type keyword.

normally – with exception for multipoles – takes one of the two forms:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> attribute-name =̄ attribute-value\
> attribute-name := attribute-value
>
> </div>

selects the attribute, as defined for the element type keyword.

provides a value to the `attribute_name`. The value may be specified by an expression. The "=" assigns the value on the right to the attribute at the time of definition, regardless of any further change of the right hand side; the ":=" re-evaluates the expression at the right every time the attribute is being used. For constant right hand sides, "=" and ":=" are of course equivalent.

Omitted attributes are assigned a default value.

**Example:**

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> QF: QUADRUPOLE, L=1.8, K1=0.015832;
>
> </div>

A special format is used for a [multipole](#sec:multipole):

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> M: MULTIPOLE, K̄N= kn0, kn1, kn2, ..., knmax,\
> KS= ks0, ks1, ks2, ..., ksmax;
>
> </div>

where `KN` and `KS` give the integrated normal and skew strengths, respectively. The commas are mandatory, each strength can be an expression; their position defines the order.\
**Example:**

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> M: MULTIPOLE, KN=0,0,0,myoct\*lrad, KS=0,0,0,0,-1.e-5;
>
> </div>

defines a multipole with a normal octupole component and a skew decapole component.

### Editing Element Definitions

An element definition can be changed in two ways:

- **Entering a new definition:** The element will be replaced in the main beam line expansion.

- **Entering the element name together with new attributes:** The element will be updated in place, and the new attribute values will replace the old ones.

This example shows two ways to change the strength of a quadrupole:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx̄ QF: QUADRUPOLE, L = 1, K1 = 0.01; ! Original definition of QF\
> \
> QF: QUADRUPOLE, L = 2, K1 = 0.02; ! Replace whole definition of QF\
> \
> QF, K1 = 0.03; ! Replace value of K1 for QF\
>
> </div>

When the type of the element remains the same, replacement of an attribute is the more efficient way.

Element definitions can be edited freely. The changes only affect already defined objects which belong to its [element class](#sec:element-classes) in case the:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> option, update_from_parent
>
> </div>

is used. In case this option is used all elements which belong to that class will be updated. An example is given in [element class](#sec:element-classes).

### Element Classes

The concept of element classes solves the problem of addressing instances of elements in the accelerator in a convenient manner.

It will first be explained by an example. All the quadrupoles in the accelerator form a class QUADRUPOLE. Let us define three subclasses for the focussing quadrupoles, the defocussing quadrupoles, and the skewed quadrupoles:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx̄ MQF: QUADRUPOLE, L = LQM, K1 = KQD; ! Focussing quadrupoles\
> MQD: QUADRUPOLE, L = LQM, K1 = KQF; ! Defocussing quadrupoles\
> MQT: QUADRUPOLE, L = LQT; ! Skewed quadrupoles
>
> </div>

These classes can be thought of as new keywords which define elements with specified default attributes. We now use these classes to define the real quadrupoles:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx̄ QD1: MQD; ! Defocussing quadrupoles\
> QD2: MQD;\
> QD3: MQD;\
> ...\
> QF1: MQF; ! Focussing quadrupoles\
> QF2: MQF;\
> QF3: MQF;\
> ...\
> QT1: MQT, K1S = KQT1; ! Skewed quadrupoles\
> QT2: MQT, K1S = KQT2;\
> ...
>
> </div>

These quadrupoles inherit from their class all attributes that are not explicitly specified at time of declaration. This allows to build up a hierarchy of objects with a rather economic input structure.

The full power of the class concept is revealed when object classes are used to select instances of elements for various purposes. Example:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> SELECT, FLAG=twiss, CLASS = QUADRUPOLE; !̄ Select all quadrupoles for the\
> ! Twiss TFS file
>
> </div>

More formally, for each element keyword `MAD-X` maintains a class of elements with the same name. A defined element becomes itself a class which can be used to define new objects, which will become members of this class. A new object inherits all attributes from its class; but its definition may override some of those values by new ones. All class and object names can be used in range selections, providing a powerful mechanism to specify positions for matching constraints and printing.

The default option is that if you change the parent of an element you will not change the children of that class. Let’s see in the following example how it works:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> mb: sbend,l:=lenseq, angle =0.001;\
> mb2: mb;
>
> </div>

This will create an element `mb` that then is used as the parent for `mb2`. If we now do want to give mb an aperture we can do the following:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> apertype=ellipse, aperture:= 1,4 ;
>
> </div>

This, however, does not modify `mb2`. In case we want `mb2` to also inherent the change from `mb` we need to use the flag

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> option, update_from_parent
>
> </div>

. This should be used with care and is only changing the direct parent.
