# Elements, Beamlines and Sequences
## Beam Lines

The accelerator to be studied is known to `MAD-X` either as a sequence of physical elements called [sequence](#chap:sequence), or as a hierarchically structured list of elements called a *beam line*. A beam line is built from simpler beam lines whose definitions can be nested to any level. A powerful syntax allows to repeat, to reflect, or to replace pieces of beam lines. However, internally `MAD-X` knows only sequences, and lines as shown below are converted into flat sequences with the same name when they are expanded. Consequently, only sequences can be SAVEd onto a file.

Formally a beam line is defined by a LINE command:

> 

[Label](#sec:label) gives a name to the beam line for later reference.

The formal argument list (arg{,arg}) is optional (see below). Each "member" may be one of the following:

- Element label,

- Beam line label,

- Sub-line, enclosed in parentheses,

- Formal argument name,

- Replacement list label.

Beam lines may be nested to any level (see <a href="#sec:sublines" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:sublines">4.2</a>)

**Warning:**\
`MAD-X` has been developed using sequences. Machine description using beamlines was kept in `MAD-X` to a minimal extent to keep backward compatibility but also because it is often easier to start from beamlines when designing an accelerator *ab initio*. But since `MAD-X` works only with sequences internally, there may exist some inconveniences when only beamlines are defined by the user. It is therefore recommended to convert beamlines into sequences (e.g. by means of the [`SAVE`](#sec:save) command) as soon as possible lines in the design phase and to use only sequences for a finalised machine.

Attempting to do sequence edition on a sequence that has been expanded in memory from a beam line specified by the user is strongly discouraged.

### Simple Beam Lines

The simplest beam line consists of single elements:

> 

Example:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> exmp1: L̄INE=(a,b,c,d,a,d);\
> USE, PERIOD=exmp1;
>
> </div>

The `USE` command causes `MAD-X` to load and expand the specified beamline. This in particular loads the beamline as a `SEQUENCE` representation in memory. All subsequent calculations are done on this sequence in memory.

### Nested Beam Lines

Instead of referring to an element, a beam line member can refer to another beam line defined in a separate command. This provides a shorthand notation for sub-lines or nested beam lines which can occur several times in a beam line. Lines and sub-lines can be entered in any order, but when a line is expanded, all its sub-lines must be known.

Example:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> top: L̄INE=(a,b,S,b,a,S,a,b);\
> S: LINE=(c,d,e);\
> USE, PERIOD=top;
>
> </div>

produces the following expansion steps:

1.  Replace sub-line S:

    > <div class="tabbing">
    >
    > (a, b, (c,d,e), b, a, (c,d,e), a, b)
    >
    > </div>

2.  Omit parentheses:

    > <div class="tabbing">
    >
    > a, b, c, d, e, b, a, c, d, e, a, b
    >
    > </div>

### Reflection and Repetition

An unsigned repetition count and an asterisk (multiplication sign) indicate repetition of a beam line member. A repetition count can be applied to sub-lines as well as elements.

A minus prefix causes reflection, i.e. all elements in the sub-line are taken in reverse order. Sub-lines of reflected lines are also reflected. Physical elements are not reflected head-to-tail, hence a negative repetition count for a single element is treated as positive.

If both reflection and repetition are desired, the minus sign must precede the repetition count.

Example:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> xxxxx̄ R: LINE= (g, h);\
> S: LINE= (c, R, d);\
> top: LINE= (2\*S, 2\*(e,f), -S, -(a,b), -2\*c);\
> USE, PERIOD=top;
>
> </div>

produces the following expansion steps:

1.  Replace sub-line S:

    > <div class="tabbing">
    >
    > ( (c,R,d), (c,R,d), (e,f), (e,f), (d,-R,c), (b,a), c, c)
    >
    > </div>

2.  Replace sub-line R:

    > <div class="tabbing">
    >
    > ( (c, (g,h), d), (c, (g,h), d), (e,f), (e,f), (d, (h,g), c), (b,a), c, c)
    >
    > </div>

3.  Omit parentheses:

    > <div class="tabbing">
    >
    > c, g, h, d, c, g, h, d, e, f, e, f, d, h, g, c, b, a, c, c
    >
    > </div>

Note that the inner sub-line `R` is reflected together with the outer sub-line `S`.

Note also that `-2*c` at the end of the `top` line is equivalent to `2*c` since single elements are not reflected, or `2*(c)` which would first promote `c` as a sub-line of a single element, or `-2*(c)` since reverting a sub-line of a single element gives the same single element.

### Replaceable Arguments

A beam line definition may contain a formal argument list, consisting of labels separated by commas and enclosed in parentheses.

> 

where `member` can be one of the `arg` arguments.

A beam line defined with arguments can be expanded for different values of its arguments. The arguments can be beam lines or element names. The number of actual arguments given at time of use must agree with the number of formal arguments defined at declaration time. All occurrences of a formal argument on the right-hand side of the line definition are replaced by the corresponding actual argument.

Example:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> fodo(Q1,Q2): L̄INE=(Q1, d, Q2, d);\
> top: LINE = ( fodo(qf12, qd23), fodo(qd34,qf45) );\
> USE, PERIOD=top;
>
> </div>

expands to

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> qf12, d, qd23, d, qd34, d, qf45, d
>
> </div>

Example showing that arguments can also be beam lines:

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> xxxxxxxx̄ s: LINE = (a,b,c);\
> l(x,y): LINE = (d,x,e,3\*y);\
> l4f: LINE = (4\*f);\
> lm2s: LINE = (-2\*s);\
> res: LINE = l(l4f,lm2s);\
>
> </div>

Proceeding step by step, this example generates the expansion

> <div class="tabbing">
>
> d, f, f, f, f, e, c, b, a, c, b, a, c, b, a, c, b, a, c, b, a, c, b, a
>
> </div>

### Limits of Construction of Beam Lines

Since `LINE`s are in fact deprecated there are some limits to how they can be constructed. Below is a running `MAD-X` example which shows a collection of valid (marked OK) and invalid cases (marked WRONG).

    !----------------------------------------------------------------------
    beam, PARTICLE=electron, energy=1;

    qf: QUADRUPOLE, L:=1,K1:=1;
    qd: QUADRUPOLE, L:=1,K1:=-1;
    d: DRIFT, l=1;
    m: MARKER;

    rpl(a,b): LINE=(a,b);
    sl: LINE=(qf,d,qd);
    test0: LINE=(rpl(sl,sl));          !OK 
    test1: LINE=(rpl((sl),(sl)));      !OK
    test2: LINE=(rpl((sl),(-sl)));     !OK
    test3: LINE=(sl,-sl);              !OK

    test4: LINE=(rpl((3*sl),(3*sl)));  ! WRONG

    test5: LINE=(3*sl,3*sl);           !OK

    test6: LINE=(rpl((3*sl),(-3*sl))); ! WRONG

    test7: LINE=(3*sl,-3*sl);          !OK

    use, period=test0; twiss,BETX=1,bety=1;
    use, period=test1; twiss,BETX=1,bety=1;
    use, period=test2; twiss,BETX=1,bety=1;
    use, period=test3; twiss,BETX=1,bety=1;
    use, period=test4; twiss,BETX=1,bety=1;
    use, period=test5; twiss,BETX=1,bety=1;
    use, period=test6; twiss,BETX=1,bety=1;
    use, period=test7; twiss,BETX=1,bety=1;
    !----------------------------------------------------------------------
