## 6.10 cornerarc

limited to 90 degrees.

Note that the radiusCut is important to reduce or eliminate
ambiguities in the global to centerline coordinate transform. It
can also be used to 'shield' the beamline to prevent particles
from taking unusual paths around the outside of beamline
elements.

This command places itself into the geometry.

Named Arguments:
z             The centerline Z of the corner (mm).
rotation      The rotation of the corner (see above).
radiusCut     The radius cut for this following segment (mm
default=previous).
radius        The radius of the circular corner volume (mm).
height        The height of the rectangular corner volume (mm).
width         The width of the rectangular corner volume (mm).
length        The length of the corner volume (mm).
maxStep       The maximum stepsize in the element (mm).
material      The material of the corner volume.
color         The color of the corner volume (''=invisible).

6.10 cornerarc    Implement a cornerarc in the centerline.

The centerline is bent by a rotation. Three corners are used to
approximate an arc; the total angle and path-length are equal to
those for the arc. Should be used immediately after an
idealsectorbend or a genericbend. The z value is for the front
face of the arc.

NOTE: This command is self-placing, do not use the place command;
it also affects all following placements, and it cannot be issued
inside a group.

This command is well matched to a sector bend, but can also be
used with a normal bending magnet -- normally the magnet is
placed before the cornerarc and is rotated by half the bend
angle.

The only useful rotations are those around the centerline Z.

z, angle, and centerRadius are required parameters.

NOTE: all placements before this command must have z values
before the corner, and all placements after this command must
have z values after the corner. Note also that the angle is
limited to 90 degrees.

Note that the radiusCut is important to reduce or eliminate
ambiguities in the global to centerline coordinate transform. It
