## 6.12 cylinder

can also be used to 'shield' the beamline to prevent particles
from taking unusual paths around the outside of beamline
elements.

This command places itself into the geometry.

Note that section 4.6 of the User's Guide has a dimensioned
drawing of a cornerarc.

Named Arguments:
z             The centerline Z of the cornerarc (mm).
centerRadius  The radius of the centerline arc (mm).
angle         The angle of bend, >0=left, <0=right (degrees).
rotation      The rotation of the cornerarc (see above).
radiusCut     The radius cut for this following segment (mm).

6.11 cosmicraybeam Define a Cosmic-Ray muon 'beam'.

The muon beam is nominally headed in the +Z direction, implying
that +Z is physically DOWN. The beam intersects a box defined by
beamWidth, beamHeight, and beamLength, centered at X=Y=0 and
beamZ. For each event a point is selected randomly within this
box, angles theta and phi and the muon momentum are generated
according to a fit to their sea-level distributions, the track is
extended backwards to the 'celestial sphere', and that is the
initial beam position for the event. The muon flux through the
rectangle at Z=beamZ is used to display an estimate of the
sea-level exposure time for the run.

This command places itself into the geometry.

Named Arguments:
nEvents       Number of events to process
beamZ         Beam location in Z (mm)
radius        Radius of celestial sphere (mm)
beamHeight    Rectangular Beam height (mm)
beamWidth     Rectangular Beam width (mm)
beamLength    Rectangular Beam length (mm)

6.12 cylinder     Alias for 'tubs'.

6.13 define       defines a macro (argument-expanded set of commands).

The first argument is the macro name, additional arguments become
lines in the body of the expanded macro. The macro name becomes a
