## 6.14 demo

command with up to 9 positional arguments. When the command is
issued, the body is expanded and executed, with these
substitutions:
$0     MacroName
$1-$9  Positional arguments of the command
$#     # macro expansions (for generating unique names)
NOTE: $paramname is expanded in the define command, but
$$paramname is expanded when the macro is invoked.

6.14 demo         demo command.

This demo command takes both positional and named args, and is
the prototype class for all commands. All argument values are
merely displayed. 'demo default name=value...' sets default
values.

Named Arguments:
s1            a demo string argument.
s2            a demo string argument.
d1            a demo double argument.
d2            a demo double argument.

6.15 detector     Construct a Detector that generates an NTuple.

A Detector generates an NTuple of tracks when they enter the
physical volume of the Detector, summing up the total energy
deposited until it leaves the volume. By default an entry in the
NTuple is generated for each event, with the track variables set
by the first track as it enters the detector. Set perTrack=1 to
generate an entry for each track.

A detector may be placed via multiple place commands (usually
with a 'rename=det#' argument to distinguish the different
placements). Each placement creates an individual NTuple.

If material is not specified, it uses Scintillator.

There are three ways to specify the geometry:
* set solid to the name of an existing solid.
* set height, width, and length to get a rectangular box.
* set radius and length (and innerRadius) to get a cylinder
(tube).
By using the solid argument you can make a detector out of any
solid, including sphere, boolean, and extrusion.

The NTuple by default uses local coordinates.

The NTuple of the detector can be included in an ntuple command
by including a pattern that matches its name in the 'detectors'
