## 6.15 detector

command with up to 9 positional arguments. When the command is
issued, the body is expanded and executed, with these
substitutions:
$0     MacroName
$1-$9  Positional arguments of the command
$#     # macro expansions (for generating unique names)
NOTE: $paramname is expanded in the define command, but
$$paramname is expanded when the macro is invoked.

6.14 demo         demo command.

This demo command takes both positional and named args, and is
the prototype class for all commands. All argument values are
merely displayed. 'demo default name=value...' sets default
values.

Named Arguments:
s1            a demo string argument.
s2            a demo string argument.
d1            a demo double argument.
d2            a demo double argument.

6.15 detector     Construct a Detector that generates an NTuple.

A Detector generates an NTuple of tracks when they enter the
physical volume of the Detector, summing up the total energy
deposited until it leaves the volume. By default an entry in the
NTuple is generated for each event, with the track variables set
by the first track as it enters the detector. Set perTrack=1 to
generate an entry for each track.

A detector may be placed via multiple place commands (usually
with a 'rename=det#' argument to distinguish the different
placements). Each placement creates an individual NTuple.

If material is not specified, it uses Scintillator.

There are three ways to specify the geometry:
* set solid to the name of an existing solid.
* set height, width, and length to get a rectangular box.
* set radius and length (and innerRadius) to get a cylinder
(tube).
By using the solid argument you can make a detector out of any
solid, including sphere, boolean, and extrusion.

The NTuple by default uses local coordinates.

The NTuple of the detector can be included in an ntuple command
by including a pattern that matches its name in the 'detectors'

argument to the ntuple command. Note that must match the name as
placed (i.e. includes rename=), not the name given to this
command. The noSingles argument may be useful in this case to
avoid a huge NTuple of singles (an empty NTuple may be created).

Note that secondary particles created within the detector will
not get an entry until they have taken one step. They are
guaranteed to do so.

For VisibleEdep, this command knows the Birks constants for
Scintillator, POLYSTYRENE, BGO, and lAr. For other materials you
must supply a value, or 0.0 will be used.

This element must be placed (via the place command).

The NTuple fields are:
x,y,z (mm)
Px,Py,Pz (MeV/c)
t (ns)
PDGid (11=e-, 13=mu-, 22=gamma, 211=pi+, 2212=proton...)
EventID (may be inexact above 16,777,215)
TrackID
ParentID (0 => primary particle)
Weight (defaults to 1.0)
Edep (Energy deposited, MeV)
VisibleEdep (Energy deposited, MeV, reduced by Birks effect)
Ntracks (# tracks of this event that hit the detector)
Valid formats: root, ascii (no extended formats).

Named Arguments (#=cannot be changed in place cmd):
radius        The radius of the circular Detector (mm).
innerRadius   The inner radius of the circular Detector (0 mm).
height        The height of the rectangular Detector (mm).
width         The width of the rectangular Detector (mm).
length        The length of the Detector (mm).
maxStep       The maximum stepsize in the element (mm).
material      The material of the Detector (Scintillator).
birks         The Birks constant (0 mm/MeV, unless known)
color         The color of the Detector (white, ''=invisible).
solid         The name of the solid to use (overrides
height,width,radius,length).
noSingles     Set to 1 to omit the NTuple for singles.
format        NTuple format: (see above for list).
filename      filename ('' uses name to determine filename)
file          alias for filename
require       Expression which must be nonzero to include the
track (default=1) #
referenceParticle Set to 1 to include the Reference Particle.
coordinates   Coordinates: global, centerline, reference, or
local (default=local).
coord         Alias for coordinates.
kill          Set to 1 kill all tracks after entering them into
NTuple(s).
perTrack      Set to 1 generate an entry for each track (default
