## 6.1 absorber

6 G4beamline Commands (Alphabetical)
6.1 absorber     construct an absorber

The absorber has two windows with beampipe and an absorber
material. Optionally it has an additional two safety windows with
beampipe. The WindowShape(s) are read from a file, and they
determine the thickness and length of the beampipe(s). For
geometry testing, acts like a cylinder enclosing the windows. For
placing children, acts like a cylinder inside the central
absorber.

This element must be placed (via the place command), and children
can be placed inside it.

Note that section 4.5 of the User's Guide has a dimensioned
drawing of an absorber.

Named Arguments (#=cannot be changed in place cmd):
absWindow     The name of the absorber window. #
safetyWindow  The name of the safety window. #
insideLength  Absorber length inside windows (mm) #
absMaterial   The material of the absorber #
windowMaterial The material of the window(s) #
safetyMaterial The material inside the safety windows. #
safetyDistance Distance between absorber and safety windows(mm) #
color         The color of the absorber (''=invisible)
maxStep       The maximum stepsize in the element (mm)

6.2 beam         Define the Beam.

The beam command is: beam type arg1=v1 ...

Types are: gaussian, rectangular, ellipse, ascii, and root.

Gaussian beams are randomly generated to emanate from
beamX,beamY,beamZ with the given sigmas; negative sigma means
flat with |sigma| as halfwidth.

Rectangular beams are randomly generated to emanate from the
rectangle beamHeight by beamWidth centered at beamX,beamY,beamZ.

Ellipse beams are randomly generated on the ellipses in (X,Xp),
(Y,Yp), (T,E), with meanE determined from meanP and the sigmas
used as half-widths; tracks are generated on the ellipse with
uniform density when plotted with scales such that the ellipse is
a circle.

ASCII beams are read from a file using the format specified; the
