## 6.21 expandworld

skip.
filename      Synonym for keep.
file          Synonym for keep.

6.20 exit         exit a command file.

The exit command ceases reading the input file, and starts the
simulation immediately (ignoring the remainder of the input
file).

6.21 expandworld  Expand the world to include specified points.

Each positional argument is x,y,z of a single point (global
coordinates). The world will be expanded to include them all.

6.22 extrusion    construct a solid extrusion with axis along z

This is a basic interface to G4ExtrudedSolid. A simple polygon in
the X-Y plane is extruded along z, with optional scales in XY at
the two ends (which generate a linear scaling along z).

The polygon must be simple (no two sides intersect, no two
vertices are equal). The vertices are listed starting from any
vertex and traversing the polygon in either direction without
lifting the pencil from the paper (Geant4 requires the traversal
to be clockwise but this element internally reverses it if
required). For an N-sided polygon give N vertices -- a side will
be added from last to first to close the polygon; N is determined
by counting the entries in the vertices argument.

Note that while you cannot make an extrusion with a hole, you can
make such an object in two parts or by placing a daughter volume
in this one.

Note the position placed is x=0,y=0,z=0, which is centered along
z, but need not be near the center of the polygon in XY.

With scale1!=scale2 this is not really an extrusion; by making
one of them 0.001 or so, you can construct a sharp apex.

Any x or y value in vertices can be an expression using double
constants and the usual C operators and functions.

This element must be placed (via the place command), and children
can be placed inside it.
