## 6.23 fieldexpr

Named Arguments (#=cannot be changed in place cmd):
length        Length of the extrusion (mm). #
vertices      List of vertices of the XY polygon (mm):
'x0,y0;x1,y1;...'; a line from last to first is
added. A 2 mm square is: '-1,-1;-1,1;1,1;1,-1' #
scale1        The XY scale at the upstream (-z) end (1.0). #
scale2        The XY scale at the downstream (+z) end (1.0). #
maxStep       The maximum stepsize in the element (mm)
material      The material of the extrusion
color         The color of the extrusion (''=invisible)
kill          Set nonzero to kill every track that enters.
vertexes      Synonym for vertices. #

6.23 fieldexpr    implements a field map, E and/or B, from expressions.

A fieldexpr element can be either a box or a cylinder; set length
and radius for cylinder, set length and width and height for a
box. Units are Tesla, MegaVolts/meter, mm, and ns. Expressions
for the field components can use {x,y,z} for a box or {z,r} for a
cylinder; the time expression can use {t}. If present, the time
expression multiples all components.

Expressions can use all C operators except ?:, and x^n is x to
the nth power (n integer). The following functions are available:
abs(), min(),max(), sqrt(), pow(), sin(), cos(), tan(), asin(),
acos(), atan(), atan2(), sinh(), cosh(), tanh(), exp(), log(),
log10(), floor(), ceil(), if(). if(condition,a,b) replaces the C
(condition? a : b).

A field map is used for tracking efficiency; the number of points
in the map is increased until the largest map error divided by
the maximum field is smaller than tolerance, or 1M points is
exceeded. Similarly for the time dependence.

For time dependence: if t-timeOffset<tmin, the value at tmin is
used; if t-timeOffset>tmax, the value at tmax is used.

Note that divide by zero is reported as invalid expression. For a
Li lens you probably want to use an expression like this:
'if(r<100,500.0*r/100,500.0*100/r)', where 100mm is the radius,
and 500T is the field at r=100mm.

This field must be placed (via the place command); that specifies
where (x=0,y=0,z=0) of the map is located in the parent. Note
that front=1 can be used to place this field.

Named Arguments (#=cannot be changed in place cmd) (@=Tunable):
factorB       Factor for the B-field (1.0). @
factorE       Factor for the E-field (1.0). @
timeOffset    Time offset (ns).
Bx            Expression for Bx (Tesla), use {x,y,z}. #
