## 6.24 fieldlines

By            Expression for By (Tesla), use {x,y,z}. #
Bz            Expression for Bz (Tesla), use {x,y,z} or {r,z}. #
Br            Expression for Br (Tesla), use {r,z}. #
Bphi          Expression for Bphi (Tesla), use {r,z}. #
Ex            Expression for Ex (MV/m), use {x,y,z}. #
Ey            Expression for Ey (MV/m), use {x,y,z}. #
Ez            Expression for Ez (MV/m), use {x,y,z} or {r,z}. #
Er            Expression for Er (MV/m), use {r,z}. #
time          Expression for time-dependence factor, use {t}. #
nX            Number of grid points in x. #
nY            Number of grid points in y. #
nZ            Number of grid points in z. #
nR            Number of grid points in r. #
nT            Number of grid points in t. #
tolerance     Required relative accuracy (0.001). #
length        Length of field map (mm). #
width         Width of rectangular field map (mm). #
height        Height of rectangular field map (mm). #
radius        Radius of cylindrical field map (mm). #
tmin          Minimum value of t (ns). #
tmax          Maximum value of t (ns). #

6.24 fieldlines   Display magnetic field lines.

Field lines are drawn starting within a circle specified as
center and radius (global coordinates); the plane of the circle
is normal to the B field at its center. Field lines are
distributed within the circle with a density inversely
proportional to |B|. While it is attempted to keep their spacing
as uniform as possible, there are both ambiguity and randomness
involved in placing the lines within the circle. Lines are placed
within the circle from its center outward, and if |B|<minField
then no more lines are placed.

nLines is only approximate, and the actual number of lines drawn
will be within a factor of 2 of the value. Asking for fewer than
10 or more than 1000 lines is likely to be ineffective. Unnamed
parameters can contain specific x,y,z values of points to start a
field line.

Lines are drawn in both directions starting from the plane of the
circle, and each half-line stops when it again reaches that
plane. Line drawing also stops whenever |B| is less than minField
or when it leaves the world. If you are interested in field lines
far outside the magnets, you may need to add some object with a
large value of x, y, and/or z, in order to expand the world
volume. With dl=1 and subdivide=10, the accuracy of their meeting
is usually better than 0.1 mm after several tens of meters.

This command does nothing if not in visualization mode. For best
results, use the Open Inventor viewer, and give your magnets a
