## 6.25 fieldmap

transparency of about 0.3 (e.g. color=1,1,1,0.3); if necessary,
use the right-button menu to set the DrawStyle/TransparencyType
to 'sorted object add'. With field lines in 3-d, you will want
the ability to zoom, rotate, and move the image interactively.

This command is not placed into the geometry.

Named Arguments:
t             Time at which field lines are plotted (0 ns).
center        Center of circle (x,y,z) to start lines (mm,
global).
radius        Radius of circle to start lines (mm).
nLines        Approximate number of field lines to plot (100).
dl            Interval between points plotted (10 mm).
color         Color of field lines (white="1,1,1").
minField      Minimum B field (0.001 tesla)
maxPoints     Max # points plotted in a line (10000).
subdivide     # field integration points between plotted points
(10).
N             # grid points in x and y (128).
exit          Deprecated and ignored.
square        Set nonzero to start from square rather than circle
(0).
Efield        Set nonzero to draw E field (0); minField is in
MegaVolts/meter.
forever       Set nonzero to draw lines until maxPoints is
reached or |B|<minField, not stopping at the
initial plane.

6.25 fieldmap     implements a field map, E and/or B, from a file.

Reads an input file in BLFieldMap format to define E and/or B
fields, optionally with time dependence. See the Users Guide for
a description of the BLFieldMap format.

This field must be placed (via the place command); that specifies
where (x=0,y=0,z=0) is located in the parent. Note that front=1
can NOT be used to place this field.

Named Arguments (#=cannot be changed in place cmd) (@=Tunable):
filename      Filename for the Field Map. #
file          Synonym for filename. #
current       Current of the B-field. @
gradient      Gradient of the E-field. @
timeOffset    Time offset (ns).
