## 6.28 g4ui

6.26 fieldntuple  Generates an NTuple from B and E fields at specified
points.

Intended primarily for debugging. This command makes it easy to
plot fields as a function of position and time, using existing
NTuple plotting tools. Outputs x,y,z,t,Bx,By,Bz,Ex,Ey,Ez into an
NTuple. Units are mm, ns, Tesla, and MegaVolts/meter. Runs after
the reference particle is tracked. Only global coordinates are
used.

The single positional argument is the name of the NTuple. Named
arguments {x,y,z,t} are of two forms specifying coordinate
values: x=Xmin,Xmax,dX or x=X1:X2:X3:... which generate the
obvious loops (single value is OK). Expressions can be used.
Omitted coordinates are held fixed at 0.0.

This command is not placed into the geometry.

Named Arguments:
category      The category of the NTuple.
format        NTuple format (see above for list).
filename      Name of file.
x             Loop for x values: Xmin,Xmaz,dX or X1:X2:... (mm)
y             Loop for y values: Ymin,Ymaz,dY or Y1:Y2:... (mm)
z             Loop for z values: Zmin,Zmaz,dZ or Z1:Z2:... (mm)
t             Loop for t values: Tmin,Tmaz,dT or T1:T2:... (ns)
exit          Set nonzero to exit after generating NTuple (0).
file          Synonym for filename.

6.27 for          For loop.

Syntax:
for i v1 v2 v3 ...
commands ...
endfor

Sets the parameter i to values v1, v2, v3, ..., and executes the
commands. Values can be any strings, including numbers, except
they cannot contain an '=' (named parameter). After completion, i
retains its last value.

Do-s, for-s, and multi-line if-s can be nested in any manner.

Note: the for command will not work from standard-input or as a
command in a single-line if.

6.28 g4ui         Accesses the Geant4 user interface
