## 6.29 genericbend

Each positional argument is executed as a Geant4 UI command,
according to the when parameter. No positional arguments means
open a UI session on stdout/stdin. For a given value of when, the
UI commands from all g4ui commands are executed in order.

Named Arguments:
when          0=before reference, 1=before beam, 2=after beam,
3=cannot be used, 4=visualization.

6.29 genericbend  construct a generic bending magnet.

The field region is a box with By specified. A fringe field
computation based on the method of COSY INFINITY is included by
default, extending the field in a rectangle extending the
straight aperture along the local z. This is first order only,
and assumes the magnet is infinitely wide; the fringe field
extends outside of the magnet aperture only in a region extending
the aperture in x and y. As the fringe field is first order only,
it is slightly non-Maxwellian. It is calculated using Enge
functions.

Note that there is no field inside the 'iron'; this can result in
gross tracking errors for particles in the iron, and implies that
kill=1 is desirable.

By default, the aperture is filled with a box volume of the
fieldMaterial; this prevents placing any object inside the
aperture. With openAperture=1 no aperture volume is used, and
objects can be placed into the parent volume that are inside the
aperture.

This element must be placed (via the place command), and children
can be placed inside it.

If ironLength<=0, ironWidth<=0, or ironHeight<=0, no iron is
used.

Named Arguments (#=cannot be changed in place cmd) (@=Tunable):
fieldWidth    The width of the field region (mm)
fieldHeight   The height of the field region (mm)
fieldLength   The length of the field region (mm)
ironWidth     The width of the iron region (mm)
ironHeight    The height of the iron region (mm)
ironLength    The length of the iron region (mm)
By            The magnetic field (Tesla) @
maxStep       The maximum stepsize in the element (mm)
fieldMaterial The material of the field region.
fieldColor    The color of the field region.
ironMaterial  The material of the iron region.
ironColor     The color of the iron region.
kill          Set nonzero to kill particles hitting the iron.
