## 6.2 beam

6 G4beamline Commands (Alphabetical)
6.1 absorber     construct an absorber

The absorber has two windows with beampipe and an absorber
material. Optionally it has an additional two safety windows with
beampipe. The WindowShape(s) are read from a file, and they
determine the thickness and length of the beampipe(s). For
geometry testing, acts like a cylinder enclosing the windows. For
placing children, acts like a cylinder inside the central
absorber.

This element must be placed (via the place command), and children
can be placed inside it.

Note that section 4.5 of the User's Guide has a dimensioned
drawing of an absorber.

Named Arguments (#=cannot be changed in place cmd):
absWindow     The name of the absorber window. #
safetyWindow  The name of the safety window. #
insideLength  Absorber length inside windows (mm) #
absMaterial   The material of the absorber #
windowMaterial The material of the window(s) #
safetyMaterial The material inside the safety windows. #
safetyDistance Distance between absorber and safety windows(mm) #
color         The color of the absorber (''=invisible)
maxStep       The maximum stepsize in the element (mm)

6.2 beam         Define the Beam.

The beam command is: beam type arg1=v1 ...

Types are: gaussian, rectangular, ellipse, ascii, and root.

Gaussian beams are randomly generated to emanate from
beamX,beamY,beamZ with the given sigmas; negative sigma means
flat with |sigma| as halfwidth.

Rectangular beams are randomly generated to emanate from the
rectangle beamHeight by beamWidth centered at beamX,beamY,beamZ.

Ellipse beams are randomly generated on the ellipses in (X,Xp),
(Y,Yp), (T,E), with meanE determined from meanP and the sigmas
used as half-widths; tracks are generated on the ellipse with
uniform density when plotted with scales such that the ellipse is
a circle.

ASCII beams are read from a file using the format specified; the

formats supported are: BLTrackFile2. The value of polarization in
the file overwrites the value from the command line. Note the
original BLTrackFile format is supported, but the additional
fields are not present. Note also that properTime, pathLength,
initialPosition, initialT, and initialKE are for THIS simulation,
and their values in the file are ignored.

Root beams are read from a .root file using the TNtuple named
directory/name in the file. It must have the same fields as used
in BLTrackFile2 format. Note that EventIDs greater than
16,777,216 will be rounded.

When reading a file (ascii or root), beamX and beamY are added to
input tracks; if beamZ is set it will overwrite the z of the
track, but if it is not set the z of the track in the file is
kept.

All coordinates are centerline coordinates.

Multiple beam commands can be given, and they will generate
events in the order they appear in input.file.

Events are generated starting at firstEvent, until either nEvents
have been generated or lastEvent would be exceeded.

This command places itself into the geometry.

Beam tracks with momentum=0 will take one step as a stoppd
particle (as desired).

For gaussian, rectangular, and ellipse beams, the beam particle
can be given as either a particle name or its integer PDGid. Some
common beam particle names are: proton, anti_proton, pi+, pi-,
mu+, mu-, e+, e-, kaon+, kaon-, kaon0, nu_e, anti_nu_e. See the
User's Guide for a complete list of particle names; ions can also
be specified by integer PDGid.

Ions are supported as beam particles, but only fully-ionized
ions, and not for Root input (a Root NTuple field cannot hold the
PDGid). Ions are specified by an integer PDGid=100ZZZAAA0, where
ZZZ is the 3-digit charge (# protons), and AAA is the 3-digit
atomic number. Note you must use physics processes appropriate
for ions.

Named Arguments:
particle      Beam particle name (default=mu+).
nEvents       Number of events to process (default=1 for
generating events, default=ALL for reading files)
set to lastEvent-firstEvent+1 if both are set.
firstEvent    First event # to process (default is the next
sequential eventID, 1 if none)
lastEvent     Last (highest) event # to process
beamX         Beam location in X (mm)
beamY         Beam location in Y (mm)
