## 6.30 genericquad

fringe        Fringe field computation, set to 0 to disable, or a
comma-separated list of 6 Enge function parameters.
fringeFactor  Fringe depth factor (1.0).
openAperture  Set nonzero to omit the aperture volume. #

6.30 genericquad  construct a generic quadrupole magnet.

The field region is a tubs with gradient specified. A positive
gradient yields a horizontally-focusing quad for positive
particles. If apertureRadius>0 the quad has a circular aperture.
For a 'rounded +' aperture using circles for the poles, set
poleTipRadius, coilRadius, coilHalfwidth. Due to visualization
bugs, in the latter case you cannot see through the aperture; it
is solid black. A fringe field computation based on the method of
COSY INFINITY is included by default, extending the field region.
This is first order only, and the fringe field extends outside of
the magnet aperture only in a cylinder extending the aperture
straight along local z. As the fringe field is first order only,
it is slightly non-Maxwellian. It is computed using Enge
functions.

Note that there is no field inside the 'iron'; this can result in
gross tracking errors for particles in the iron, and implies that
kill=1 is desirable.

This element must be placed (via the place command), and children
can be placed inside it.

If ironLength <= 0, no iron is constructed.

Note that section 4.7 of the user's Guide has a dimensioned
drawing of the genericquad aperture.

Named Arguments (#=cannot be changed in place cmd):
fieldLength   The length of the field region (mm)
ironLength    The length of the iron (mm)
ironRadius    The outer radius of the iron (mm)
apertureRadius The radius of the aperture (mm)
poleTipRadius The inner radius of the pole tips (mm).
coilRadius    The radius of the inside of the coil (mm).
coilHalfwidth The halfwidth of the coil (mm).
coilHalfWidth Synonym for coilHalfwidth.
gradient      The magnetic field gradient, dBy/dx (Tesla/meter)
maxStep       The maximum stepsize in the element (mm)
ironMaterial  The material of the iron region.
fieldMaterial The material of the field region.
ironColor     The color of the iron region.
kill          Set nonzero to kill tracks hitting the iron.
fringe        Fringe field computation, set to 0 to disable, or a
comma-separated list of 6 Enge function parameters.
fringeFactor  Fringe depth factor (1.0).
