## 6.32 geometry

openAperture  Set nonzero to omit the aperture volume. #

6.31 genericsectorbend construct an generic sector bending magnet.

The field region is a sector with multi-function field specified.
For straight magnets set fieldRadius=-1. Unlike most Elements,
the position of the genericsectorbend is the center of the front
face of its field (aperture). angle>0 bends to the left around Y;
angle<0 bends right. The only useful rotations are around the
centerline Z. This element should normally be followed
immediately by a cornerarc. Note that -90<=angle<=90 degrees.

Note that there is no field inside the 'iron'; this can result in
gross tracking errors for particles in the iron, and implies that
kill=1 is desirable.

Named Arguments:
angle         Angle of bend (degrees).
fieldCenterRadius Center radius of field (mm).
fieldInnerRadius Inner radius of field (mm).
fieldOuterRadius Outer radius of field (mm).
fieldHeight   Height of field (mm).
ironInnerRadius Inner radius of iron (mm).
ironOuterRadius Outer radius of iron (mm).
ironHeight    Height of iron (mm).
fieldMaterial Material of field.
fieldColor    Color of field.
ironMaterial  Material of iron.
ironColor     Color of iron.
maxStep       The maximum stepsize in the element (mm)
kill          Set nonzero to kill particles hitting the iron.
SolenoidalField Solenoidal field (Tesla).
DipoleField   Dipole field (Tesla).
QuadrupoleField Quadrupole field (Tesla/meter).
SkewQuadrupoleField Skew Quadrupole field (Tesla/meter).
SextupoleField Sextupole Field (T/m^2).
SkewSextupoleField Skew Sextupole Field (T/m^2).
OctupoleField Octupole Field (T/m^3).
SkewOctupoleField Skew Octupole field (T/m^3).
fringe        Fringe field computation, set to non-zero to
enable.
fringeFactor  Fringe depth factor (1.0).

6.32 geometry     Arranges to perform a geometry test.

The geometry test checks nPoints points on the surface of each
element, verifying that they are inside the parent element and
that they are not inside any sibling element. The default of 100
