## 6.33 group

points is usually sufficient; 0 means omit the geometry test. The
first 10-40 points (depending on element) test 'corners', the
rest are randomly distributed on the surface. The default
tolerance is 0.002 mm.

Points which fail are identified with a visible marker. set
visible=1 to put a green marker at all tested points.

This command is not placed into the geometry.

Named Arguments:
nPoints       The number of surface points to test per element
printGeometry Set nonzero to print the entire geometry.
visual        Set nonzero to display the geometry test points.
tolerance     Tolerance for inside/outside tests (mm).

6.33 group        begins definition of a group.

A group is a collection of elements that can be placed together,
preserving their relative positions. The group is a LogicalVolume
in the geant4 geometry -- this means that a group cannot overlap
any other group or object, even if the overlapping portion of the
group is empty. If you need to permit overlaps, consider using a
macro instead (the define command).

If the group is given a length, then children can be placed at
specific z offsets relative to the center of the group. If the
group is not given a length, then children can only be placed
sequentially along z, and the length will be computed by the
endgroup command. Width and height are computed from the largest
child or the argument. If radius is set to 0, the group will be a
cylinder with radius determined by the largest width or height
placed into it; if >0 then that is the fixed radius. If radius is
not set then a box is used.

This element must be placed (via the place command).

Note: when placing objects into a group, if the rename argument
is used, it should begin with a '+' to include the group's name
in the object's name; otherwise there may be multiple objects
with the same name -- this is only a major problem for
virtualdetector-s and other output objects. The group's name is
included by default if no rename is used on the place command.

Named Arguments (#=cannot be changed in place cmd):
length        Overall group length along z (mm) #
width         Overall group width (mm) #
height        Overall group height (mm) #
radius        Radius for a cylindrical group (mm) #
material      Material of the volume outside children
