## 6.34 helicaldipole

color         Color of the volume of the group
maxStep       The maximum stepsize in the volume (mm)

6.34 helicaldipole construct a helicaldipole magnet.

The field region is a cylinder with a helical dipole field plus a
solenoid field. The simple model=1 provides just a sine and
cosine transverse dependence, while the maxwellian model=2 has
both dipole and quadrupole terms. Both the dipole scale bD [T]
and quadrupole scale bQ [T/m] are now at rho=0; the user must
determine the correct values externally.

Note that this Element generates a magnetic field only, and only
within the cylinder defined by length and radius. So it has no
solid associated with it, and is invisible.

Named Arguments:
radius        The radius of the field region (mm)
model         The model of field calculated(simple=1, rpj and ysd
model=2, ttominaka et al model=3), modulations in
bd,bq,bz= 4
length        The length of the field region (mm)
bD            The dipole magnitude at rho=0 (Tesla).
lambda        Helix period along the Z axis (mm).
phi0          The phase of the XY field at the entrance (deg).
Bsolenoid     The value of Bsolenoid (Tesla).
bQ            The quadrupole magnitude at rho=0 (Tesla).
bs            The sextupole magnitude at rho=0 (Tesla).
rr            Reference radius (mm)
psi0          The offset between the dipole term and the
quadrupole term (Degrees).
ez            The base electric field inside the helix channel
(GV/m).

6.35 helicalharmonic construct a helicalharmonic magnet.

Creates a cylindrical region containing the field of a magnetic
helical harmonic of given order [n]. The field is defined by the
value of the (n-1) order derivative [b] of the vertical field
component (when the initial phase is 0) with respect to the
horizontal coordinate at the center of the helix:
b=d^(n-1)B_phi/dr^(n-1) @ [r=0 & phi-k*z+phi0=0],
where k=2*pi/lambda is the helix's wave number, [lambda] is the
length of the helix's period, and phi0 is the initial phase. The
field components in the cylindrical frame are given by:
B_phi=(2/(n*k))^(n-1)*b*(I[n-1](n*k*r)-I[n+1](n*k*r))*
cos(n*(phi-k*z+phi0)),
B_r  =(2/(n*k))^(n-1)*b*(I[n-1](n*k*r)+I[n+1](n*k*r))*
sin(n*(phi-k*z+phi0)),
