## 6.37 idealsectorbend

B_z  =-2*(2/(n*k))^(n-1)*b*I[n](n*k*r)*cos(n*(phi-k*z+phi0)),
where I[n](x) is the modified Bessel function of the first kind
of order [n].

This element must be placed (via the place command).

Note that this Element generates magnetic field only, and only
within the cylinder defined by length and radius. So it has no
solid associated with it, and is invisible.

Named Arguments:
radius        The radius of the field region (mm)
length        The length of the field region (mm)
n             Order of helical harmonic (i.e. n=1 for dipole)
b             (n-1)-order derivative of the field at the center
(T/m^(n-1))
lambda        Helix period along the Z axis (mm).
phi0          The phase of the XY field at the entrance (rad).

6.36 help         provides interactive help.

help with no arguments lists all commands. 'help command' gives
more detailed help on that command. 'help *' gives detailed help
for all commands. If the first argument is -exit the program will
exit after printing the help.

6.37 idealsectorbend construct an ideal sector bending magnet.

The field region is a sector with By specified. Unlike most
Elements, the position of the idealsectorbend is the center of
the front face of its field (aperture). angle>0 bends to the left
around Y; angle<0 bends right. The only useful rotations are
around the centerline Z. This element should normally be followed
immediately by a cornerarc. Note that -90<=angle<=90 degrees.

No fringe fields are implemented.

if ironHeight<=0, no iron is generated.

Note that there is no field inside the 'iron'; this can result in
gross tracking errors for particles in the iron, and implies that
kill=1 is desirable.

This element must be placed (via the place command), and children
can be placed inside it.

Named Arguments (@=Tunable):
angle         Angle of bend (degrees).
