## 6.41 label

6.40 isotropicsource Define an isotropic source.

Generates tracks isotropically emanating from the point {x,y,z}
(global coordinates).

If any sigma is < 0, a uniform distribution is generated with
HalfWidth=|sigma|.

This element must be placed (via the place command).

Named Arguments:
particle      Beam particle name or PDGid
nEvents       Number of events to generate (default=1)
firstEvent    First event # to generate (default is the next
sequential eventID, 1 if none)
x             Beam location in X (mm)
y             Beam location in Y (mm)
z             Beam location in Z (mm)
weight        Weight for events (1.0)
secondaryTrackID The next TrackID for secondaries (1001).
meanP         Beam mean momentum (MeV/c)
P             Synonym for meanP.
sigmaP        Beam sigma in P (MeV/c)
meanT         Beam mean in T (ns)
t             Synonym for meanT.
sigmaT        Beam sigma in T (ns)

6.41 label        Display labels, markers, or polylines visually in 3-D space.

Each positional argument is X,Y,Z of the position; as many
positions as desired can be used. The same text is displayed at
each position. Empty text means use a circular marker; line=1
means draw a polyline.

The marker or label always faces the camera.

The default height of text is 12 pixels; the default diameter of
markers is 5 pixels; some viewers have rather narrow limits on
sizes.

This command is not placed into the geometry, it only draws.

Coordinates can be either centerline or global (the default).

If present, the file is read for additional points; as only the
first three columns are read, a BLTrackFile can be used.

Named Arguments:
text          The text of the label; empty => circular marker.
color         The color (1,1,1).
size          The size in pixels.
