## 6.43 list

coordinates   Coordinates (global).
file          File to read for points.
line          Set nonzero to draw a polyline.

6.42 lilens       construct a simple Lithium lens.

This element consists of a current-carrying cylinder and its
field. The field exists only between the end planes of the
cylinder, out to radial infinity.

This element must be placed (via the place command), and children
can be placed inside it.

Named Arguments:
radius        The radius of the current-carrying cylinder (5 mm)
length        The length of the cylinder (100 mm).
current       The current in the cylinder (100000 Amp).
material      The material of the cylinder (Li).
color         The color of the tube or cylinder (''=invisible)
maxStep       The maximum stepsize in the element (mm).

6.43 list         provides interactive list of interesting internal tables.

list with no arguments lists all lists except processes. 'list
name' lists that specific one. 'list -exit name(s)' will exit
after listing. List names are:
commands    all commands
materials   currently known materials
physics     all physics lists
particles   currently known particles
processes   currently known physics processes ***
NOTE: the particles and processes lists are not populated until
the physics list is selected (via the physics command). Different
physics lists use different processes and particles.

***NOTE: listing processes will prevent any simulating, as will a
non-empty particle list.

Named Arguments:
particle      Comma-separated list of particles for which details
will be printed

6.44 man          Alias for 'help'.
