## 6.46 movie

require       An expression that must evaluate nonzero or the
track is killed.
aaa           Effective Atomic Weight of the material (g/mole)

6.46 movie        Generate movie NTuple.

This command outputs a set of NTuples suitable for generating a
movie.

Named Arguments:
coordinates   Coordinates: global, centerline, or reference
(default=r).

6.47 multipole    construct a generic multipole magnet.

Multipole magnetic fields from dipole through dodecapole are
implemented with a cylindrical field region and optional
surrounding iron (ironLength=0 or ironRadius=0 omits it). All
fields with positive strengths are oriented so in the X-Z plane
for X>0 (beam left) the field is purely By. Negative strengths
are allowed and reverse the field. The fringe field computation
is not implemented.

This element must be placed (via the place command), and children
can be placed inside it.

Named Arguments (#=cannot be changed in place cmd):
fieldLength   The length of the field region (mm)
ironLength    The length of the iron (mm)
ironRadius    The outer radius of the iron (mm)
apertureRadius The radius of the aperture (mm)
ironMaterial  The material of the iron region.
fieldMaterial The material of the field region.
dipole        Strength of dipole (Tesla)
quadrupole    Strength of quadrupole (T/m)
sextupole     Strength of sextupole (T/m^2)
octopole      Strength of octopole (T/m^3)
decapole      Strength of decapole (T/m^4)
dodecapole    Strength of dodecapole (T/m^5)
ironColor     The color of the iron region.
kill          Set nonzero to kill tracks hitting the iron.
maxStep       The maximum stepsize in the element (mm)
fringe        Fringe field computation, set to 0 to disable
fringeFactor  Fringe depth factor (1.0).
openAperture  Set nonzero to omit the aperture volume. #
