## 6.48 muminuscapturefix

6.48 muminuscapturefix Fixes up the G4MuonMinusCapture process.

This class adds extra neutrons to mu- capture. The neutrons are
added with a Poisson distribution having a mean of
neutronMeanNumber, and with an exponential distribution in
kinetic energy:
(1/neutronMeanEnergy)*exp(-KE/neutronMeanEnergy)
As the muonic atom cascades to its ground state it forgets the
incident mu- direction, so the extra neutrons are generated
isotropically in the lab.

The extra neutrons are added only to those captures that are
hadronic (i.e. not decay in orbit). The value of
neutronMeanNumber should reflect this.

The default values correspond to Aluminum.

NOTE: the Geant4 processes have changed since this command was
designed and validated, and they believe this command is no
longer necessary; the user must ensure correct physics is
implemented.

Named Arguments:
neutronMeanNumber Mean mumber of extra neutrons per nuclear
capture (2.5).
neutronMeanEnergy Mean energy of neutron spectrum (MeV)

6.49 muonium      Define the muonium (Mu) particle and processes.

Muonium is an atom, and there are lots of detailed atomic physics
processes that are NOT modeled here. This is good enough to model
muonium transport in vacuum, and adsorbing, reflecting, or
stripping at a surface; nothing else is modeled, and these are
only approximated and parameterized. The ionization energy of Mu
is known to be within 0.5% of Hydrogen (13.6 eV).

MuoniumDecay: the Mu lifetime is the same as for mu+; it is split
into an e- and a decaying_mu+. In the Mu rest frame they have
equal and opposite momenta in a random direction; they share 13.6
eV of KE, with the ratio from a classical orbit. The decaying_mu+
is a mu+ which decays immediately.

MuoniumSurface: handles stripping, reflecting, and adsorbing at a
surface; parameters are stripMFP, minDensity, E1, E2, E3, and E4.
The mean-free-path for stripping is ASSUMED to be independent of
KE and material; the default value is from [1] (silica aerogel).
If the material being entered has a density < minDensity, the Mu
is transported WITHOUT ENERGY LOSS. Otherwise its KE determines
which process applies: if KE<E1, it is adsorbed or reflected; if
KE>E2 it is stripped; between E1 and E2 the probabilities are
linear. If it is not stripped, then if KE<E3 it is adsorbed; if
