## 6.4 boolean

PDGid (11=e-, 13=mu-, 22=gamma, 211=pi+, 2212=proton, ...)
EventID (may be inexact above 16,777,215)
TrackID
ParentID (0 => primary particle)
Weight (defaults to 1.0)

The following additional fields are appended for format=Extended,
format=asciiExtended, and format=rootExtended:
Bx, By, Bz (Tesla)
Ex, Ey, Ez (Megavolts/meter)
ProperTime (ns)
PathLength (mm)
PolX, PolY, PolZ (polarization)
InitX, initY, InitZ (initial position, mm)
InitT (initial time, ns)
InitKE (MeV when track was created)

Valid Formats (ignore case): ascii bltrackfile dummy for009
for009.dat root trackfile Extended asciiExtended rootExtended

Named Arguments (#=cannot be changed in place cmd):
format        The NTuple format (see above for list).
filename      The filename for the NTuple.
file          Synonym for filename.
require       Expression which must be nonzero to include the
track (default=1) #
coordinates   Coordinates: global, centerline, or reference
(default=c).

6.4 boolean      Construct an element from a boolean operation between
elements.

This command takes a pair of simple elements and creates a new
element that is a boolean operation between the solids of the
initial elements. Boolean operations are: union, subtraction, and
intersection. Simple elements are those consisting of a single
solid, with no EM field: boolean, box, extrusion, polycone
sphere, tessellatedsolid, torus, trap, tubs.

The command is:
boolean op=subtraction e3 e1 e2 [args...]
This creates element e3 from the subtraction of e2 from e1. e1,
e2, and e3 can be used in further boolean operations, or can be
placed into the world.

The local coordinates of the new element are those of the first
element. If material is not specified, the material of the first
element is used.

The two input solids should intersect, and the resulting solid
should be a single piece; if not the results are undefined.
