## 6.50 newparticlentuple

KE>E4 it is reflected, and between E3 and E4 the probabilities
are linear.

For stripping and decay the Mu polarization is transferred to the
mu+.

NOTE: This command must come before the 'physics' command.

[1] Prog. Theor. Exp. Phys. 2013, 103C01 (10 pages)
DOI:10.1093/ptep/ptt080 Bakule et al, Measurement of muonium
emission from silica aerogel

Named Arguments:
E1            The KE below which all Mu adsorb or reflect (11.6
eV).
E2            The KE above which all Mu strip (27.2 eV).
E3            The KE below which all un-stripped Mu adsorb (1.36
eV).
E4            The KE above which all un-stripped Mu reflect (11.6
eV).
stripMFP      The mean free path for stripping (gram/cm2).
minDensity    The minimum density below which Mu do not interact
in any way (gram/cm3).
verbose       Set nonzero for verbose prints (0).

6.50 newparticlentuple NTuple containing particle tracks when created.

Note that initial beam particles are included, unless require is
set to 'ParentID>0'.

This command is not placed into the geometry.

The standard NTuple fields are:
x,y,z (mm)
Px,Py,Pz (MeV/c)
t (ns)
PDGid (11=e-, 13=mu-, 22=gamma, 211=pi+, 2212=proton, ...)
EventID (may be inexact above 16,777,215)
TrackID
ParentID (0 => primary particle)
Weight (defaults to 1.0)

The following additional fields are appended for format=Extended,
format=asciiExtended, and format=rootExtended:
Bx, By, Bz (Tesla)
Ex, Ey, Ez (Megavolts/meter)
ProperTime (ns)
PathLength (mm)
PolX, PolY, PolZ (polarization)
InitX, initY, InitZ (initial position, mm)
