## 6.51 ntuple

InitT (initial time, ns)
InitKE (MeV when track was created)

Valid Formats (ignore case): ascii bltrackfile dummy for009
for009.dat root trackfile Extended asciiExtended rootExtended

Named Arguments (#=cannot be changed in place cmd):
format        The NTuple format (see above for list).
filename      The filename for the NTuple.
file          Synonym for filename.
require       Expression which must be nonzero to include the
track (default=1) #
coordinates   Coordinates: global, centerline, or reference
(default=c).
kill          Set nonzero to kill tracks after entering into
NTuple; does not kill track if require fails (0).

6.51 ntuple       Define an NTuple containing multiple detectors.

An ntuple holds the data from multiple detectors in a single
NTuple, with one row (entry) per event or per track. This permits
the generation of plots that compare different detectors. Up to
64 detectors can be used. While 'detector' is used in this
description, any existing NTuple can be used, generated by any
command, such as: virtualdetector, zntuple, beamlossntuple,
timentuple, and newparticlentuple.

There are two ways the detectors can be combined: the default
method is to construct a new NTuple that combines the fields of
all the detectors, each prepended with the detector name. If
union=1 is given, then all detectors must have the same list of
fields, and that list is used for this NTuple; any hit in any
detector is simply copied to this NTuple -- this permits multiple
detectors to be combined into a single NTuple (you may want
noSingles=1 for the detectors). With union=1, the 'required',
'veto' and 'minHit' arguments cannot be used.

By default, an entry in this ntuple is made for each event
satisfying the require, veto, and minHit conditions; if
perTrack=1 then an entry is made for each track that satisfies
the require, veto, and minHit conditions. Any hit in any detector
matching the patterns in veto will prevent the event/track from
being entered into the ntuple.

If multiple hits occur in a given detector during the event or
track, only the first one is kept in this ntuple. Detectors are
specified by patterns identical to UNIX file-matching, so '*Det*'
matches any detector with 'Det' anywhere in its name, etc. The
'required' argument permits events to be omitted unless all of
the matching detectors were hit at least once in the event or
track. The patterns in 'required' are applied only to detectors
