## 6.52 output

in the ntuple, so a simple '*' only matches detectors named in
the 'detectors' argument.

If union is nonzero, the hits in each detector are entered into
this NTuple as they occur; each hit in any detector is included
as a row in this NTuple. All detectors must have the same fields,
which are used for this NTuple.

This command is not placed into the geometry.

NOTE: the name of a detector is by default the concatenation of
its ancestors' names before its own (except World), unless
rename=NAME was used in its place command. The patterns are
applied to the names of the virtualdetectors as they were placed
(including rename), not the bare name of the virtualdetector
command. If 'rename=det#' was used when placing the
virtualdetector-s, you probably want a * to match the #, or list
them individually (det1,det2,det3...).

NOTE: This command does not work correctly in collective tracking
mode, unless union=1.

Valid Formats (ignore case): ascii bltrackfile dummy for009
for009.dat root trackfile

Named Arguments:
category      The category of the NTuple.
detectors     A comma-separated list of detector patterns.
required      A comma-separated list of required detector
patterns(default=*).
veto          A comma-separated list of detector patterns, any
hit cancels entry into the NTuple (default='').
format        NTuple format (see above for list).
filename      Name of file.
minHit        Minimum number of detectors hit (default 0).
perTrack      Nonzero for an entry per track; 0 for an entry per
event (default 0).
union         Set nonzero to perform a union of the detectors,
rather than combining them.
require       Synonym for required.
minHits       Synonym for minHit.
file          Synonym for filename.

6.52 output       redirects stdout and stderr to a file

output requires one argument, the new output file. Any output
generated before this command will not appear in the file, so
this command should come at the start of the input.file, preceded
only by setting parameters. After the redirection, it will
re-print the G4beamline version and the current parameter values
to the file. The most common usage is to redirect output to a
