## 6.53 param

file named like the .root file, when that is determined by
parameter values:
param -unset param1=1.0 param2=3.0
param histofile=$param1,$param2
output $histofile.out

6.53 param        Defines parameter values.

Parameters are named strings used to parameterize the input file;
a few are used for program control. Parameters are set by the
param commend, and on the command line (all program arguments
after the first are interpreted as name=value).

'param name=value ...' defines parameters. If no arguments are
present, all parameters are displayed. If the first argument is
'-unset', this command will not overwrite parameters that are
already set (e.g. from the command line - this permits the
input.file to set defaults that can be overridden on the command
line).

Parameters are expanded only in the arguments of commands: 'cmd
argname=$paramname [...]'; real-valued expressions for arguments
can use $paramname as a value, as long as paramname contains a
valid real expression.

Parameters are most useful for setting global things like viewer
and histoFile, or as parameters used in the input.file.

When a parameter is used, if it has not been defined, it will be
defined from the environment if possible; if it is not defined in
the environment then this generates an error message.

The values of parameters are strings, but if the value of a
parameter is set to a valid real expression including at least
one operator {+-*/^<>=()!~&%|?}, the parameter value will be set
to the numerical value of the expression to 8 significant digits.

NOTE: pre-defined Program control parameters (listed below) are
defined before the command-line and are not affected by -unset.

Program control Parameters:
Zcl                 Last centerline Z position used (updated continuously)
deltaChord          Geant4 tracking parameter
deltaIntersection   Geant4 tracking parameter
deltaOneStep        Geant4 tracking parameter
epsMax              Geant4 tracking parameter
epsMin              Geant4 tracking parameter
eventTimeLimit      CPU Time Limit (sec)
fieldVoxels         Size of voxels for field computation (mm)
histoFile           Default (Root) NTuple output filename
histoUpdate         Output update interval (events)
