## 6.55 particlefilter

minus, and neutral will set the colors for unnamed particles by
their charge (default to blue, red, green). The name reference
will apply to the reference track(s) (defaults to invisible).

6.55 particlefilter Will kill particles from a list, or force particles to decay.

A particlefilter will force the decay of certain particles when
they enter the physical volume of the element. The list of
affected particles is in the 'decay' argument, and the normal
Decay process is disabled for them. In addition, the 'kill'
argument is a list of particles to kill when they enter the
element, and the 'keep' argument will kill all particles not
named, if it is not empty.

require is an expression invloving track parameters that will
kill the track if it evaluates to zero (use a comparison
operator). The variables available are:
x,y,z,t,Px,Py,Pz,Ptot,PDGid,EventID,TrackID,ParentID
Units are mm, ns, MeV/c.

If nWait > 1, particles will not be killed until they hit this
element nwait times; this can be used to limit the number of
revolutions around a ring. Decays are unaffected by nWait.
referenceWait does the same for the reference particle The
element can be either a cylinder or a box: set length and radius,
or set length and width and height.

This element must be placed (via the place command), and children
can be placed inside it.

Named Arguments (#=cannot be changed in place cmd):
radius        The radius of the cylindrical particlefilter (mm).
innerRadius   The inner radius of the cylindrical particlefilter
(0 mm, solid).
height        The height of the rectangular particlefilter (mm).
width         The width of the rectangular particlefilter (mm).
length        The length of the particlefilter (mm).
maxStep       The maximum stepsize in the element (mm).
material      The material (default=parent's).
color         The color of the particlefilter (white).
decay         A comma-separated list of particle names to decay.
#
kill          A comma-separated list of particle names to kill. #
keep          A comma-separated list of particle names to keep. #
nWait         Intersection # to do the kill (default = 1)
referenceWait Intersection # for reference (default = 1)
require       Expression which will kill the track if zero. #
steppingVerbose Nonzero to display track kills.
decays        Synonym for decay. #
