## 6.56 particlesource

6.56 particlesource Interface to the Geant4 General Particle Source.

The Geant4 General Particle Source (GPS) is a very flexible and
general way to generate events. It is controlled by Geant4
commands which should follow this command in the input.file. If
you have a macro, you can include it using either the G4beamline
'include' command or the Geant4 command '/control/execute'. Note
that G4beamline only recognizes Geant4 commands when the '/' is
in column 1.

Due to the design of the GPS, only one particlesource command can
be used, but the GPS permits multiple sources to be combined.

NOTE: the Geant4 General Particle Source inherently uses global
coordinates, so this is most useful at the beginning of a
beamline when global=centerline. Note also that it is very easy
to generate a beam headed in the -z direction (this command will
rotate to the +z direction: '/gps/ang/rot1 -1 0 0').

This command is not placed into the geometry.

To use this, see the User Manual for the GPS at
http://reat.space.qinetiq.com/gps

Named Arguments:
nEvents       Number of events to process (default=1), set to
lastEvent-firstEvent+1 if both are set.
firstEvent    First event # to process (default is the next
sequential eventID, 1 if none)
lastEvent     Last (highest) event # to process
secondaryTrackID The next TrackID for secondaries (1001).

6.57 physics      Defines the physics processes and controls them.

Exactly one physics command must be present. This command
implements the geant4 physics lists of physics processes. The
command is 'physics QGSP' for the QGSP list, and similarly for
the other lists. With no argument it prints the available physics
lists. 'default' will select a standard list, currently
FTFP_BERT.

Note that stochastic processes are always disabled while tracking
the tune and reference particles. The only non-stochastic
processes are Transportation and ionization energy loss (with
fluctuations disabled).

For muon beam studies you may want to disable the Decay process.

spinTracking=1 will enable tracking the spins of e+, e-, mu+, and
mu- (only), including pion decays to polarized muons, polarized
muon decays, and the force from the particle's magnetic moment.
