## 6.57 physics

6.56 particlesource Interface to the Geant4 General Particle Source.

The Geant4 General Particle Source (GPS) is a very flexible and
general way to generate events. It is controlled by Geant4
commands which should follow this command in the input.file. If
you have a macro, you can include it using either the G4beamline
'include' command or the Geant4 command '/control/execute'. Note
that G4beamline only recognizes Geant4 commands when the '/' is
in column 1.

Due to the design of the GPS, only one particlesource command can
be used, but the GPS permits multiple sources to be combined.

NOTE: the Geant4 General Particle Source inherently uses global
coordinates, so this is most useful at the beginning of a
beamline when global=centerline. Note also that it is very easy
to generate a beam headed in the -z direction (this command will
rotate to the +z direction: '/gps/ang/rot1 -1 0 0').

This command is not placed into the geometry.

To use this, see the User Manual for the GPS at
http://reat.space.qinetiq.com/gps

Named Arguments:
nEvents       Number of events to process (default=1), set to
lastEvent-firstEvent+1 if both are set.
firstEvent    First event # to process (default is the next
sequential eventID, 1 if none)
lastEvent     Last (highest) event # to process
secondaryTrackID The next TrackID for secondaries (1001).

6.57 physics      Defines the physics processes and controls them.

Exactly one physics command must be present. This command
implements the geant4 physics lists of physics processes. The
command is 'physics QGSP' for the QGSP list, and similarly for
the other lists. With no argument it prints the available physics
lists. 'default' will select a standard list, currently
FTFP_BERT.

Note that stochastic processes are always disabled while tracking
the tune and reference particles. The only non-stochastic
processes are Transportation and ionization energy loss (with
fluctuations disabled).

For muon beam studies you may want to disable the Decay process.

spinTracking=1 will enable tracking the spins of e+, e-, mu+, and
mu- (only), including pion decays to polarized muons, polarized
muon decays, and the force from the particle's magnetic moment.

The rare pion decay to e nu is included, but the e are
unpolarized. The muon decays give the correct distribution for
the electron, but only approximate distributions for the
neutrinos, and all are unpolarized.

NOTE: this command defines the particles used throughout the
simulation, so this command must come before others that use
particle names.

NOTE: the rare decay mode for pi+/pi- to e nu is always added,
with branching ratio 1.230E-4.

The default all-around physics list for HEP is called
'FTFP_BERT'.

NOTE: At present there is a bug in Geant4 tracking and the
magnetic moment is not used. For >~ 0.1 GeV muons and practical
fields this is a very small error.

NOTE: the RadioactiveDecay process is added to all ions.

Named Arguments:
disable       Comma-separated list of processes to disable (e.g.
'Decay,msc').
inactivate    Synonym of disable.
deactivate    Synonym of disable.
doStochastics Set to zero to disable all stochastic processes.
fluct         Set to zero to disable ionization energy loss
fluctuations.
minRangeCut   Minimum range cut for particle production (1 mm)
list          Nonzero to list the processes (later in output).
gammaToMuPair Nonzero to add gamma->mu+mu- (0).
spinTracking  Nonzero to track particle spins (0).
synchrotronRadiation Nonzero to add synchrotron radiation to the
physics list for e- and e+.
synchrotronRadiationMuon Nonzero to add synchrotron radiation to
the physics list for mu- and mu+ NOTE: This is
experimental, and may not work correctly.
maxTime       Maximum time for tracking (1000000ns).

----- PHYSICS LISTS -----

Further guidance in selecting physics lists is available at:

http://geant4-userdoc.web.cern.ch/geant4-userdoc/UsersGuides/PhysicsListGuide/h
tml/index.html

The default all-around physics list for HEP is 'FTFP_BERT'.

Each basic physics list uses the standard Geant4 electromagnetic
physics Opt0. This can be changed by adding one of these suffixes
(the best but slowest is _EMZ):
_EMV EM Opt1 less precise but faster.
_EMX EM Opt2 less precise but faster.

_EMY EM Opt3 it uses a set of EM processes with accurate
simulation of gamma and charged particle transport. Only the
Urban multiple scattering model is used for all charged
particles and all energies. Slower.
_EMZ EM Opt4 the best set of electromagnetic physics models
selected from the low energy and standard packages. With its
concentration on the best possible physics, electromagnetic
option 4 is slower than the standard EM package.
_LIV is made on top of electromagnetic option 3 by substitution
of standard models for gamma and electrons from Livermore
set of models.
_PEN is made on top of electromagnetic option 3 by substitution
of standard models for gamma, electrons and positrons from
Penelope-2008 set of models.
_GS is made on top of the default electromagnetic configurations
by substitution of the Urban multiple scattering model for
electrons and positrons by the Goudsmit-Saunderson model.
_LE is made on top of the default electromagnetic configurations
by substitution of the Urban multiple scattering model for
electrons and positrons by the LowEWentzelVI model. Also,
using 5D gamma conversion model and Lindhard-Sorensent model
for ion ionisation.
_WVI is made on top of the default electromagnetic configurations
by substitution of the Urban multiple scattering model for
electrons and positrons by the WentzelVI model and ATIMA ion
ionisation model.
_SS is made on top default electromagnetic configurations by
substitution of all multiple scattering models by single
scattering models.

The basic physics lists specify the hadronic modeling (can add EM
suffix):
FTFP_BERT The current Geant4 default, good for most HEP users.
QBBC      Recommended for medical and space physics simulations.
QGSP_BERT The former Geant4 default, good for most HEP users.
QGSP_BIC  Another list for HEP.
Shielding Recommended for simulation of deep shielding. Neutrons
of 20 MeV and lower use the High Precision neutron
models and cross sections to describe elastic and
inelastic scattering, capture and fission. The G4NDL
database is required for this physics list.

These physics lists are available:
FTFP_BERT For calorimetry, colliders, and general HEP. Based on
the Fritiof description of string excitation and
fragmentation. Uses Geant4 Bertini cascade for primary
protons, neutrons, pions and Kaons below ~10GeV.
FTFP_BERT_TRV identical to FTFP_BERT except that several
electromagnetic and hadronic models are substituted by
their alternative.
FTFP_BERT_ATL identical to FTFP_BERT except that transition
between the FTF model and the Bertini cascade is changed
for Atlas.
FTFP_BERT_HP identical to FTFP_BERT except that neutrons of 20

MeV and lower use the High Precision neutron models and
cross sections to describe elastic and inelastic
scattering, capture and fission. The G4NDL database is
required.
FTFQGSP_BERT identical to FTFP_BERT except that QGS string model
is used.
FTFP_INCLXX identical to FTFP_BERT except that the Bertini
cascade is substituted by the INCL++ cascade.
FTFP_INCLXX_HP identical to FTFP_INCLXX except that neutrons of
20 MeV and lower use the High Precision neutron models and
cross sections to describe elastic and inelastic
scattering, capture and fission. The G4NDL database is
required.
FTF_BIC identical to FTFP_BERT except that the Binary cascade is
used as by the FTF model instead of internal FTF cascade
code for rescattering of secondary particles within
nucleus.
LBE    For low background experiments (e.g. underground)
QBBC   Similar to FTFP_BERT but optimized for medical and space
physics. Recomended for applications where accurate
simulation for low-energy transport of protons and
neutrons is needed. It usually produces the best agreement
in the energy range below 1 GeV for thin target
experiments.
QGSP_BERT Uses the QGS quark-gluon model with the Bertini cascade
model.
QGSP_BERT_HP identical to QGSP_BERT except that neutrons of 20
MeV and lower use the High Precision neutron models and
cross sections to describe elastic and inelastic
scattering, capture and fission. The G4NDL database is
required.
QGSP_BIC Similar to QGSP_BERT, except the BIC binary cascade
model is used.
QGSP_BIC_HP identical to QGSP_BIC except that neutrons of 20 MeV
and lower use the High Precision neutron models and cross
sections to describe elastic and inelastic scattering,
capture and fission. The G4NDL database is required.
QGSP_BIC_AllHP identical to QGSP_BIC except that neutrons,
protons, and light ions of 20 MeV and lower use the High
Precision models and cross sections to describe elastic
and inelastic scattering, capture and fission. The G4NDL
database is required for this physics list.
QGSP_FTFP_BERT identical to QGSP_BERT except that neutrons of 20
MeV and lower use the High Precision neutron models and
cross sections to describe elastic and inelastic
scattering, capture and fission. The G4NDL database is
required.
QGSP_INCLXX identical to QGSP_BERT except that the Bertini
cascade is substituted by the INCL++ cascade.
QGSP_INCLXX_HP identical to QGSP_BERT_HP except that the Bertini
cascade is substituted by the INCL++ cascade. The G4NDL
database is required.
QGS_BIC No synopsis available.
Shielding Recommended for simulation of deep shielding. Neutrons
