## 6.58 pillbox

of 20 MeV and lower use the High Precision neutron models
and cross sections to describe elastic and inelastic
scattering, capture and fission. The G4NDL database is
required for this physics list.
ShieldingLEND different configurations of low-energy neutron
transport with LEND option.
ShieldingM different transition from the Bertini model to the FTF
model: from 9.5 to 9.9 GeV.
NuBeam No synopsis available.

NOTE: all _HP lists require the G4NDL dataset.

6.58 pillbox      Defines a pillbox RF cavity

A Pillbox RF cavity is the basic RF element used to construct a
linac. The phaseAcc parameter sets the phase of the tune particle
at the center of the cavity, and the timing offset of the cavity
is determined from that the first time that the Tune particle is
tracked through the cavity. Zero degrees is the rising
zero-crossing of the Ez field. If timeOffset is specified, it is
used rather than setting it from the Tune particle.

The Pipe, walls, and collars are always made of copper. Pipe,
wall, collar, win1, and win2 can be omitted by setting their
thickness to 0. Common usage is to set the collar values so by
placing multiple pillboxes sequentially the collars form a beam
pipe between them.

Note that section 4.4 of the User's This element must be placed
(via the place command).

Guide has a dimensioned drawing of a pillbox.

Named Arguments (#=cannot be changed in place cmd) (@=Tunable):
maxGradient   The peak gradient of the cavity (MV/m) @
color         The color of the cavity
frequency     The frequency of the cavity (GHz) #
innerLength   The inside length of the cavity (mm) #
innerRadius   The inside radius of the cavity (mm) #
pipeThick     The thickness of the pipe wall (mm) #
wallThick     The thickness of the cavity walls (mm) #
irisRadius    The radius of the iris (mm) #
collarRadialThick The radial thickness of the collar (mm) #
collarThick   The thickness of the collar along z(mm) #
win1Thick     The thickness of the central portion of the
windows; zero for no window (mm) #
win1OuterRadius The radius of the central portion of the windows
(mm) #
win2Thick     The thickness of the outer portion of the windows;
zero for no window (mm) #
winMat        The material of the windows
