## 6.59 place

phaseAcc      The reference phase of the cavity (degrees)
skinDepth     The skin depth (mm) #
timingTolerance Tolerance for timing tuning (ns)
maxStep       The maximum stepsize in the element (mm).
cavityMaterial Material of cavity volume (Vacuum).
timeOffset    Time offset for cavity (default: tuned by tune
particle) (ns).
timeIncrement Increment to timeOffset, applied AFTER tuning.
(ns).
fieldMapFile  Filename for BLFieldMap (pillbox if null). #
kill          Set nonzero to kill tracks that hit the pipe,
walls, or collars (0).

6.59 place        places an element into the current group (or world).

Every element can be placed multiple times into the beamline. For
most elements the geometrical centerpoint is placed; for polycone
the local x=y=z=0 point is placed. If front is nonzero then the
front of the element is placed (and any rotation is applied at
the front). If z is specified, then the element is placed at that
z position relative to the center of the enclosing group. If z is
not specified, then the element is placed immediately downstream
(higher z) of the previous element in the group, or at the
upstream edge of the group if this is the first element in the
group.

The 'rename' argument can be used to change the name of the
element (applies to traces and other uses of object names, such
as the NTuple name of a virtualdetector). When placing into a
group or other object, the rename argument should normally begin
with '+' to include the parent's name; otherwise multiple
placements of the parent will generate multiple objects with
identical names -- that should be avoided for output objects like
virtualdetector. Without a rename argument, the parent's name is
included automatically.

When multiple copies are placed, z refers to the first, and the
rest are placed sequentially along z. When placing an element
into the World group, Centerline coordinates are used unless
coordinates=global is present. When centerline coordinates are
used, the parameter 'Zcl' is set to the highest Z value used;
this is normally the Z value for the front of the next element
when placed sequentially (i.e. with no z value given).

Rotations: The rotation parameter can be used to rotate this
element relative to the enclosing group. The object is rotated,
not the axes. Rotations are specified as a comma-separated list
of axes and angles (in degrees): rotate=Z90,X45 rotates first by
90 degrees around Z and then by 45 degrees around X. The axes are
the local X,Y,Z coordinate axes of the enclosing group
(centerline or global coordinate axes for the World group);
