## 6.60 polycone

groups can be rotated when placed, and are rotated as a rigid
unit (including children).

If parent=name is present, then the name must be an element that
accepts children, and it is used as the enclosing group; in this
case the size of the group is implied by the size of the parent
element, and z must be given (defaults to 0). Note that a given
element cannot be the parent of any other element once it has
been placed, so you must place children into their parent before
placing their parent.

If the special element 'OFFSET' is given, x, y, and z specify
offsets for every following place command into the current group
(incl. World), that gives a z position.

Named Arguments:
z             Z position of element's center relative to the
center of the enclosing group (mm).
x             X position of element's center [default=0] (mm)
y             Y position of element's center [default=0] (mm)
parent        Parent element name (must accept children).
rename        Name to use for this placement; '#' will be
substituted by the number of placements. If the
value begins with '+', it is replaced with the
parent's name.
copies        Number of copies (placed sequentially along z).
front         Nonzero to specify z for the front, not the center.
rotation      Rotation of this object.
coordinates   Coordinates: global or centerline (default=c).

6.60 polycone     construct a polycone with axis along z

This is a direct interface to G4Polycone. For a solid polycone,
omit innerRadius and it will be filled with zeroes. The number of
entries in z, innerRadius, and outerRadius must be the same. Note
that a polycone is placed at its z=0,r=0 point, which need not be
its geometric center.

This element must be placed (via the place command), and children
can be placed inside it.

Named Arguments (#=cannot be changed in place cmd):
innerRadius   Comma-separated list of inner radii (mm) #
outerRadius   Comma-separated list of outer radii (mm) #
z             Comma-separated list of z positions (mm) #
initialPhi    The initial Phi value (deg; 0 for all)
finalPhi      The final Phi value (deg; 360 for all)
maxStep       The maximum stepsize in the element (mm)
material      The material of the polycone
color         The color of the polycone (''=invisible)
kill          Set nonzero to kill every track that enters.
