## 6.62 printfield

6.61 printf       prints track variables and expressions

This is an interface to the C printf() function. The first
positional argument is the format, and the following positional
arguments are double expressions printed with the % fields in the
format. Up to 16 expressions can be printed. The print is
performed only if the 'required' expression is nonzero, as each
track reaches one of the Z positions in the 'z' argument
(centerline coordinates). Multiple printf commands with the same
'file' will be combined into the file as tracks reach any of
their Z positions. More than 16 expressions can be broken into
multiple printf-s with noNewline=1 for all but the last.

The following variables can be used in expressions:
x,y,z,t,Px,Py,Pz
PDGid,EventID,TrackID,ParentId,Weight
Bx,By,Bz, Ex,Ey,Ez
tune (nonzero only for the Tune particle)
reference (nonzero only for the Reference particle)
beam (nonzero for any Beam particle)

Each value in z and zloop can be an expression using double
constants and the usual C operators and functions.

Example:
printf z=0 'Momentum is %.3f GeV/c' sqrt(Px*Px+Py*Py+Pz*Pz)/1000

This command is not placed into the geometry.

NOTE: if format begins 'Ptot=...' the parsing will think it is a
named argument; put a space before the '=' to avoid that error.

Named Arguments:
z             Comma-separated list of Z positions for printing
(mm)
zloop         Loop in z, first:last:incr (mm)
require       logical expression for cutting (default=true)
file          Output filename (default="-" => stdout)
filename      Synonym for file
noNewline     set nonzero to omit final newline.
coordinates   Coordinates: global, centerline, or reference
(default=c).

6.62 printfield   Prints E or B fields, or writes FieldMap file.

Prints the value of the electromagnetic field components. For
type=print, prints one component of the field in a 2-d table. Any
coordinate plane can be printed (XY ... ZT). For type=grid or
