## 6.63 probefield

type=cylinder, writes a file in fieldmap format. Global
coordinates are used. Units are Tesla for B and MV/meter for E.

This command is not placed into the geometry.

NOTE: This command cannot handle time dependency in the output
BLFieldMap file, but can in the printout.

Note: if you want to plot field vs position or time, the
'fieldntuple' command is probably better, as it is not limited to
the 2-d paper, is easier to use, and lets you use existing NTuple
plotting tools. If you just want to test a few points, the
'probefield' command lets you do that interactively.

Named Arguments:
type          print, grid, or cylinder.
exit          Set nonzero to exit after printing field
Arguments for type=print:
field         The field to print (Bx,By,Bz,Ex,Ey,Ez,Btot,Etot).
layout        Layout (RowCol) - 2 chars 'AB' each of {xyzt}.
x             The starting value of x (mm).
y             The starting value of y (mm).
z             The starting value of z (mm).
t             The starting value of time (ns).
drow          The incr between points in each row (mm|ns).
dcol          The incr between points in each column (mm|ns).
nrow          The number of rows.
ncol          The number of columns.
Arguments for type=grid:
file          Filename to write fieldmap to.
comment       Comment for fieldmap.
X0            Initial value of X (mm, default=0).
Y0            Initial value of Y (mm, default=0).
Z0            Initial value of Z (mm, default=0).
nX            Number of points in X.
nY            Number of points in Y.
nZ            Number of points in Z.
dX            Interval in X between points (mm).
dY            Interval in Y between points (mm).
dZ            Interval in Z between points (mm).
Arguments for type=cylinder:
file          Filename to write fieldmap to.
comment       Comment for fieldmap.
Z0            Initial value of Z (mm, default=0).
nR            Number of points in R.
dR            Interval in R between points (mm).
nZ            Number of points in Z.
dZ            Interval in Z between points (mm).

6.63 probefield   Prints B and E fields at specified points.
