## 6.64 profile

Intended primarily for debugging. Prints Bx,By,Bz in Tesla, and
Ex,Ey,Ez in MegaVolts/meter. Each input line is x,y,z,t separated
by spaces or commas; omitted values are set to 0.0.

Field Values are printed after the reference particle is tracked.
Only global coordinates are used.

Positional arguments are used as input lines before reading the
inputFile.

This command is not placed into the geometry.

Named Arguments:
inputFile     Filename for reading list of points (- = stdin)
outputFile    Filename for output (- = stdout)
exit          Set nonzero to exit after printing field

6.64 profile      write beam profile information to a file

This command accumulates the moments of the track distributions
during the run, and at the end of run prints the mean, sigma,
emittance (RMS), alpha, and beta (Twiss parameters) for the
tracks. Each z position generates a line in the output file.

Each value in z and zloop can be an expression using double
constants and the usual C operators and functions.

NOTE: This computation has two rather serious deficiencies:
1) it includes all tracks, with no sigma cut, so a single
outlier track can have a large effect on sigmas and
emittances.
2) its emittance does not include the vector potential.
To avoid these deficiencies, it may be better to write NTuples
and apply an external program such as ecalc9.

This command is not placed into the geometry.

Named Arguments:
z             Comma-separated list of Z positions for profiling
(mm)
zloop         Loop in z, first:last:incr (mm)
require       logical expression for cutting (default=true)
particle      Name of particle to profile (default=mu+)
file          Output filename (default=stdout)
filename      Synonym for file
coordinates   Coordinates: centerline or reference (default=c).

6.65 randomseed   control pseudo random number generator seeds
