## 6.66 rdecaysource

This randomseed command controls the pseudo random number
generator seed at the start of each event. The unnamed argument
can be any of (case insensitive):
EventNumber
None
Time
Set 12345
Now 12345
EventNumber is the default and permits events to be re-run; None
does not re-seed the PRNG at each event, and Time is like None
after seeding with the time of day in microseconds; Set (Now)
seeds the generator immediately with the value of the second
argument (a long), and then acts like None.

Named Arguments:
print         Set to 1 to print the next random number at the end
of each event.

6.66 rdecaysource Generates a 'beam' from radioactive isotopes in the
world.

Scans the world for radioactive isotopes. If the isotopes
argument is set, only those are used, otherwise all unstable
isotopes are used. Unstable isotopes are decayed in place,
wherever they appear in the geometry.

The argument 'duration' specifies over what time interval (from
t=0) generation will take place. The weighted sum of all
generated tracks will be appropriate for the radioactive decay of
the unstable nuclei in the world over that duration.

This source has two modes: mode=1 is appropriate for use by a
simulation program that handles radioactive decay itself; mode=2
is appropriate for a simulation program that does not. mode=1
preserves the time dependence of ion energy deposition, mode=2
does not; both preserve the overall ion energy deposition (over
all time).

In mode 1 (default): this source generates all ordinary particles
that are produced within duration of t=0. Unstable nuclei with
lifetimes < 1us have their kinetic energy saved, set to 0, and
then are tracked so they decay. Stable nuclei, and unstable
nuclei with lifetime >= 1us are output and killed, adding any
saved KE. This makes the approximation that no unstable nucleus
moves significantly, but the energy deposited by ions is
preserved, including its time dependence (within 1us).

In mode 2: this source generates all ordinary particles and
stable ions that result from the initial nuclear decay. Unstable
nuclei in the decay chain are not output, but are tracked so they
decay. This makes the approximation that no unstable nucleus
