## 6.67 reference

moves significantly; its kinetic energy is forced to 0, and its
original kinetic energy is added to the next stable ion that is
output -- this preserves the energy deposited by ions (but not
its time dependence), and avoids generating extraneous
very-low-energy electrons.

This source generates the appropriate weighted number of events
for duration; if nEvents is 0, the appropriate number of events
is generated so they have weight=1; if nEvents is set, that many
events will be generated with weight set appropriately; duration
and nEvents apply to the first radioactive decay, but not to
subsequent decays in the chain. Note that to get the entire chain
in mode=2, 'trackcuts maxtime=1E99' is normally needed, as
radioactive decay is quite slow (can be gigayears).

File format is always BLTrackFile (i.e ASCII).

This command is not placed into the geometry.

verbose controls printout vebosity:
0 print only event summary.
1 also print summary of unstable nuclei in volumes (default).
2 also print summary of tracks generated (one line per track).
3 also print steppingVerbose.
4 also print details of stacking action.
5 track all particles regardless of mode (DEBUGGING - double
counts).

Named Arguments:
isotopes      Comma-separated list of isotopes (default=All).
duration      Duration of generation (1us).
nEvents       Number of events to generate (default is however
many are generated during duration).
mode          Mode of the source (see text).
first         First EventID to generate (default=1).
maxTime       Maximum time in lab (1E99 ns).
verbose       Verbosity level of printouts (default=1).
showMarkers   Set nonzero to display a marker at the origin of
each generated track.
showDecayChain # events to display the decay chan (0).
dump          Set nonzero to dump the ion table.

6.67 reference    Define a reference particle.

The reference particle is nominally headed in the +Z direction.
Multiple reference particles can be defined, at different
positions, momenta, particle types, etc. All coordinates are
centerline coordinates.

If desired, the referenceMomentum will be tuned to a specific
value at a later z position in the beamline by giving values for
