## 6.68 rfdevice

tuneZ, and tuneMomentum; tolerance can be set if desired.

Normally used in conjunction with a 'beam' command.

This command is not placed into the geometry.

Named Arguments:
particle      Reference particle name
beamX         Reference location in X (mm)
beamY         Reference location in Y (mm)
beamZ         Reference location in Z (mm)
beamT         Reference time (ns)
rotation      Rotation of the beam
referenceMomentum Reference particle momentum (MeV/c)
beamXp        Reference particle Xp (radians)
beamYp        Reference particle Yp (radians)
meanMomentum  Synonymn for referenceMomentum
meanXp        Synonym for beamXp.
meanYp        Synonym for beamYp.
tuneZ         Z position for momentum tuning.
tuneMomentum  Desired momentum for momentum tuning.
tolerance     tolerance for momentum tuning (0.001 MeV/c).
noEfield      Set nonzero to make this Tune and Reference
particle not respond to E fields (ICOOL style)
noBfield      Set nonzero to make this Tune and Reference
particle not respond to B fields (ICOOL style)
noEloss       Set nonzero to make this Tune and Reference
particle not respond to ionization energy loss
(ICOOL style)
P             Synonym for referenceMomentum

6.68 rfdevice     Defines an rfdevice (RF cavity)

An rfdevice (RF cavity) is the basic RF element used to construct
a linac. The G4beamline convention is that 0degRF is the positive
going zero crossing of the electric field, so generally
phaseAcc=90 (degRF) is on-crest.

The timeOffset parameter, if set, fixes the overall global
absolute timing of the cavity relative to time=0 of the
simulation. If unspecified, 0degRF is determined via the
timingMethod setting. The default, timingMethod=atZlocal, defines
0degRF such that the test particle will arrive at the timingAtZ=#
location then.

For longitudinal cavities, timingMethod=maxEnergyGain emulates
how most cavities in linacs have their overall timing determined;
while maxX would be appropriate for a horizontal transverse
deflecting cavity.

Independent of how 0degRF is found, exactly two of the set of

maxGradient, phaseAcc, and one fixed output quantity
(fixMomentum, fixEnergyGain, fixTransitTime, fixXdeflection, or
fixYdeflection) must be specified to deterimine the final
rfdevice timing. For example, with maxGradient and phaseAcc set,
the energy gain would be determined, while if maxGradient and
fixEnergyGain were set, the phaseAcc would be determined.

The pipe, walls, and collars are made of copper by default. Pipe,
wall, collar, win1, and win2 may be omitted by setting their
thickness to 0. Common usage is to set the collar values such
that, by placing multiple rfdevices sequentially, the collars
form a beam pipe between them.

Note that section 4.4 of the User's Guide has a dimensioned
drawing of a pillbox. Due to the presence of an (usually)
invisible timing volume, care must be taken when placing objects
within an rfdevice.

This element must be placed (via the place command), and children
can be placed inside it.

See the User's Guide for details on how to use this complex
element.

Named Arguments (#=cannot be changed in place cmd) (@=Tunable):
maxGradient   The peak gradient of the cavity (MV/m) @
color         The color of the cavity
frequency     The frequency of the cavity (GHz) #
innerLength   The inside length of the cavity (mm) #
innerRadius   The inside radius of the cavity (mm) #
pipeThick     The thickness of the pipe wall (mm) #
wallThick     The thickness of the cavity walls (mm) #
wallMat       The material of all the walls [Cu]
irisRadius    The radius of the iris (mm) #
collarRadialThick The radial thickness of the collar (mm) #
collarThick   The thickness of the collar along z(mm) #
win1Thick     The thickness of the central portion of the
windows; zero for no window (mm) #
win1OuterRadius The radius of the central portion of the windows
(mm) #
win2Thick     The thickness of the outer portion of the windows;
zero for no window (mm) #
winMat        The material of the windows [Be].
phaseAcc      The reference phase of the cavity (degrees).
skinDepth     The skin depth (mm). #
timingTolerance Tolerance for timing tuning (ns)
maxStep       The maximum stepsize in the element (mm).
cavityMaterial Material of cavity volume [Vacuum].
timeOffset    Time offset for cavity [set via timingMethod] (ns).
@
timeIncrement Increment to timeOffset, applied AFTER tuning.
(ns).
timingMethod  Method for determining the nominal timeOffset {atZ,
maxE, noE, minE, maxT, nomT, minT, maxX, noX, minX,
