## 6.69 sample

maxY, noY, minY}.
timingAtZ     Local Z location for timing (mm).
fixMomentum   Specify total output momentum (MeV/c).
fixEnergyGain Specify energy gain (MeV).
fixTransitTime Specify transit time (ns).
fixXdeflection Specify local output XZ angle (deg).
fixYdeflection Specify local output YZ angle (deg).
fixTolerance  Specify allowable error on fixed settings [1.e-3].
verbose       Set nonzero to show timing volume and print info
messages [1].
fieldMapFile  Filename for BLFieldMap (pillbox if null). #
kill          Set nonzero to kill tracks that hit the pipe,
walls, or collars [0].

6.69 sample       Sample tracks into an NTuple.

A sample generates an NTuple of any track when it crosses the
local X-Y plane. By default either direction is sampled, but if
dir=1 only Pz>0 is sampled, and if dir=-1 only Pz<0 is sampled.
These are all in local coordinates. While this element does not
define a volume, it must be placed via the 'place' command; the
local origin is placed (and the local Z axis is rotated with the
sample plane).

The sample is taken for a disk defined by the specifiied radius
from (x=0,y=0). If polygon is not empty, then it must be simple
(edges do not intersect each other, no holes); only tracks inside
it are sampled, and radius is set for the vertex furthest from
the origin (the polygon need not include the origin, but sampling
is most efficient if the local origin is near the center of the
polygon). Remember that the +x direction is beam LEFT, +y is up,
+z is along the beam.

Note this element linearly interpolates the track to its plane,
using pairs of steps which bracket the plane. So if tracks are
not straight (EM fields, multiple scattering), be sure that
maxStep in surrounding volumes is small enough for good results.

This element does not affect tracking, but it can be placed along
the side of a solid that does; tolerance is used to ensure that
0-length steps when entering a daughter volume will not generate
multiple samples.

This element must be placed (via the place command).

The standard NTuple fields are:
x,y,z (mm)
Px,Py,Pz (MeV/c)
t (ns)
PDGid (11=e-, 13=mu-, 22=gamma, 211=pi+, 2212=proton, ...)
EventID (may be inexact above 16,777,215)
