## 6.6 bug1021

Note that for op=subtraction, the two elements should not share
any common faces; to create a hole, the subtracted (second)
element should extend at least a micron outside the first
element.

The values of width, height, and length default to those of e1.
If taht is not correct, provide the correct values as arguments.

Note also that visualization of boolean solids may not work
properly, except for the RayTracer viewer. Tracking is fine.

This element must be placed (via the place command).

Named Arguments:
maxStep       The maximum stepsize (mm).
material      The material of the boolean.
color         The color of the boolean (white).
kill          Set nonzero to kill every track that enters.
op            The boolean operation (union, subtraction, or
intersection).
x             The x offset of element2 relative to element1 (mm).
y             The y offset of element2 relative to element1 (mm).
z             The z offset of element2 relative to element1 (mm).
rotation      The rotation of element2 ('').

6.5 box          construct a box.

This is a direct interface to G4Box.

This element must be placed (via the place command), and children
can be placed inside it.

Named Arguments:
height        The height of the box (mm).
width         The width of the box (mm).
length        The length of the box (mm).
maxStep       The maximum stepsize in the element (mm).
material      The material of the box.
color         The color of the box (''=invisible).
kill          Set nonzero to kill every track that enters.

6.6 bug1021      Workaround to improve accuracy of bug1021 in E field

When a charged particle turns around in an E field, a bug in the
Geant4 transportation process can sometimes give it a
wildly-incorrect kinetic energy. This workaround computes the
distance to turn-around, and limits the step to half that vlue
