## 6.70 setdecay

TrackID
ParentID (0 => primary particle)
Weight (defaults to 1.0)

The following additional fields are appended for format=Extended,
format=asciiExtended, and format=rootExtended:
Bx, By, Bz (Tesla)
Ex, Ey, Ez (Megavolts/meter)
ProperTime (ns)
PathLength (mm)
PolX, PolY, PolZ (polarization)
InitX, initY, InitZ (initial position, mm)
InitT (initial time, ns)
InitKE (MeV when track was created)

Valid Formats (ignore case): ascii bltrackfile dummy for009
for009.dat root trackfile Extended asciiExtended rootExtended

Named Arguments (#=cannot be changed in place cmd):
radius        The radius of the circular Sample (mm).
polygon       The vertices of an X-Y polygon outlining the sample
region (x1,y1;x2,y2;x3,y3;... mm).
dir           Required direction: 1=+Z, -1=-Z, 0=either (0).
tolerance     Tracking tolerance (2 microns).
noSingles     Set to 1 to omit this NTuple (still can be used in
the ntuple command) (0).
format        NTuple format: (see above for list).
filename      filename ('' uses name to determine filename)
file          alias for filename
require       Expression which must be nonzero to include the
track (default=1) #
referenceParticle Set to 1 to include the Reference Particle.
coordinates   Coordinates: global, local, centerline, or
reference (default=c).
kill          Set to 1 kill all tracks after entering them into
NTuple(s).

6.70 setdecay     Set lifetime, decay channels, and branching ratios for a
particle's decay.

The particle is specified by name as the first positional
argument.

The lifetime of the particle can be set, unless it is a
short-lived particle (for which lifetime is fixed at 0 -- these
are particles like quarks, Zs, and Ws). Units are ns.

Decay channels are specified 'daughter1,daughter2=BR', where the
daughter names are separated by commas, and the branching ratio
is a value between 0 and 1 (inclusive); the order of daughters
does not matter. The sum of all BRs must be 1.0. It is best to
