## 6.73 sourceonly

use existing channels for the particle, because the code for the
decay distribution is retained; new decay channels are given a
default phase-space distribution, which is probably valid only
for a 2-body decay of a spin 0 particle. New channels are limited
to 4 daughters. Note that all desired decay channels must be
listed.

Example to force fast decay (0.1 ns) of pi+ to a positron:
setdecay pi+ lifetime=0.1 e+,nu_e=1.0

6.71 showmaterial Set the colors for selected materials.

Arguments are of the form 'name=1,1,0', where name is the name of
a material, and 1,1,0 is the R,G,B value desired for its color
('' for invisible) Set hideOthers=1 to make all other materials
invisible. BEWARE: 'Vacuum' and 'vacuum' are different materials,
as are 'Iron' and 'Fe'.

6.72 solenoid     defines a solenoid (a coil and current)

A solenoid is a coil and a current. If alternate is nonzero, then
each placement of the solenoid (or an enclosing group) will flip
the sign of current.

This element must be placed (via the place command), and children
can be placed inside it.

Named Arguments (#=cannot be changed in place cmd):
coilName      The name of the coil (must exist) #
current       The current density in the conductor (Amp/mm^2)
color         The color of the solenoid (''=invisible).
alternate     Set nonzero to alternate sign each placement.
kill          Set nonzero to kill all tracks that hit the coil.
coil          Synonym for coilName. #

6.73 sourceonly   Run a source-only simulation.

More to come...

Named Arguments:
filename      Filename of output file.
format        Format of output file (BLTrackFile).
file          Synonym for filename.
