## 6.74 spacecharge

6.74 spacecharge  Beam-frame Green's function space charge computation

This is a space charge computation for bunched beams. It uses a
grid in the beam frame to solve Poisson's equation via a Green's
function with infinite boundary conditions; the E field is
boosted back to the lab frame E and B for tracking.

Macro-particles are used to enable the simulation of larger
bunches than can be feasibly simulated as individual particles;
the macro-particles have zero radius, but are pro-rated into the
nearest eight grid points when placed into the grid. This
computation can handle up to about a million macro-particles, but
100,000 is more sensible for all but the simplest physical
situations.

The bunch is created from the beam tracks before tracking begins.
There is one bunch for each reference particle. Particles in the
bunch must be the same particle as the reference, must initially
be within {dx,dy,dz} of the reference particle, and when boosted
to the reference particle's rest frame must initially have beta <
maxBeta.

After boosting the particles to the beam frame, they are placed
into the grid, pro-rating to the eight nearest grid points. The
grid is dynamically re-sized to keep the 99th percentile of the
particles between 0.5 and 0.67 of the grid size. This maintains a
reasonable balance between resolution of grid points within the
bunch and covering all of the particles. Particles located at
>85% of the grid size do not contribute to the field computation,
but are tracked using the field of the rest of the bunch (and
other bunches).

The grid has {nx,ny,nz} points; there is a small computational
advantage to using powers of 2, but any values >1 can be used.
For efficiency, the convolution of the Green's function with the
charge grid is performed using FFTs; the grid is doubled in each
dimension with the proper symmetry applied to the Green's
function, so the cyclical convolution of the FFTs gives the
proper potential with infinite boundary conditions.

Outside the grid an approximation is used. An approximation grid
is constructed, with the same size of the Poisson grid, but using
{nxApprox,nyApprox,nzApprox} points. Particles are placed into
this approximation grid, and the mean position is kept as well as
the charge. Approximation grid points with less than 1% of the
total charge are consolidated with their inner neighbors. The
non-zero approximation grid points are treated as point charges
when computing the potential outside the grid. For reasonably
Gaussian bunches, {7,7,7} are reasonable values for the
approximation grid sizes.

The E field in the beam frame is computed via the derivatives of
the linear interpolating function using the eight nearest grid
