## 6.75 spacechargelw

points, and is boosted back to the lab frame E and B for tracking
by the usual Geant4 routines.

Bunch particles that get destroyed cease contributing to the
bunch. As the bunch particles are selected during start-up, no
additional particles are ever added to a bunch. This algorithm
handles multiple bunches of any particle types.

NOTE: For now, the reference MUST be parallel to the Z axis.

Named Arguments:
deltaT        Time step (ns).
charge        Charge of macro particles (times particle charge).
nx            Number of grid points in x (65).
ny            Number of grid points in y (65).
nz            Number of grid points in z (65).
dx            Max distance of particle to reference in x (mm)
dy            Max distance of particle to reference in y (mm)
dz            Max distance of particle to reference in z (mm)
nxApprox      # bins in x in approximation (7).
nyApprox      # bins in y in approximation (7).
nzApprox      # bins in z in approximation (7).
maxBeta       Max beta (v/c) of particle in beam frame (0.1).
verbose       Non-zero for verbose prints (0).
ignoreFieldWhenTracking For testing only (0).
useApproximationOnly For testing only (0).
fixedGrid     Nonzero prevents re-sizing the grid (0).
percentile    Percentile of charge distribution used for grid
sizing (99).
minActive     Minimum # active tracks in bunch; if < 0 is % of
initial bunch size (-95).

6.75 spacechargelw Lienard-Wiechert space charge computation

This is a space charge computation that uses macro-particles to
simulate more particles than is feasible to track individually.
Each macro-particle is tracked as a single particle, but its
charge is multiplied by the macro-particle charge when computing
the field. The radius of the macro-particle is used to avoid the
singularity from a point charge; outside the radius the
macro-particle is treated as a point charge; inside the radius
the point-charge field is multiplied by (r/radius)^K (radius and
K are parameters).

The trajectory of every particle is kept, and when computing the
field at a point, the intersection of the point's past lightcone
with the trajectory is used to determine the field from the
macro-particle; there is a loop over all particles except the one
currently being tracked. This computation scales as N^2, where N
is the number of macro-particles; that makes it computationally
infeasible for more than a few hundred macro-particles. But for
