## 6.77 start

the particles used, it is correct to within the following
approximations: a) using macro-particles, b) linearly
interpolating between steps, c) omitting the radiation term in
the L-W potential.

The fields are computed using eq. 63.8-9 (p 162) of Landau and
Lifshitz, _Classical_Theory_of_Fields_, ignoring the radiation
term. The computed fields are used in the usual Geant4 tracking.
Particle creation and destruction are handled properly.

This algorithm is primarily intended to test other space charge
algorithms.

Named Arguments:
deltaT        Time step (ns).
radius        Radius of macro-particles (mm).
charge        Charge of macro-particles (times particle charge).
trackTwice    0=linear extrapolation, 1=track (0)
verbose       Non-zero for verbose prints (0).
K             Exponent for macro-particle density (1).
ignoreFieldWhenTracking For testing only (0).

6.76 sphere       construct a sphere (or section of one)

This is a direct interface to G4Sphere.

This element must be placed (via the place command), and children
can be placed inside it.

Named Arguments:
innerRadius   The inside radius of the sphere (mm)
outerRadius   The outer radius of the sphere (mm)
initialPhi    The initial Phi value (deg; 0 for all)
finalPhi      The final Phi value (deg; 360 for all)
initialTheta  The initialTheta of the sphere (deg, 0 for all)
finalTheta    The finalTheta of the sphere (deg, 180 for all)
maxStep       The maximum stepsize in the element (mm)
material      The material of the sphere
color         The color of the sphere (''=invisible)
kill          Set nonzero to kill every track that enters.

6.77 start        Define the initial start of centerline coordinates.

If used, this command must come before any other command that
puts an element into the world or affects the centerline
coordinates (place, beam, corner, cornerarc, and reference
commands). This command may not always be needed, but it is
needed to eliminate the ambiguities in the global to centerline
coordinate transform, and when simulating a ring to ensure that
