## 6.7 coil

until minStep is reached; at that point the track is reflected.

Simulations in which there are no E fields, or no charged
particle ever gets below ~0.001 MeV in an E field, have no need
to apply this workaround.

This command is not placed into the geometry.

Named Arguments:
minStep       Minimum step in space (mm, default=0.002)

6.7 coil         defines a coil (part of a solenoid)

A coil is a geometrical tube that can carry current when part of
a solenoid. The field is computed for a set of nSheets
infinitely-thin current sheets evenly spread radially. The
solenoid specifies the actual current. For tracking the
computation is too slow, so a field map on a grid in r and z is
computed and written to filename (defaults to coilname.dat).
While there are lots of parameters specifying the field map it is
recommended to simply accept the defaults for all but
innerRadius, outerRadius, length, material, and possibly
tolerance. The other parameters will be determined so that the
largest error is less than tolerance times the value of Bz at the
center of the coil. If mapFile is given, the file is read in
BLFieldMap format. The cache file contains the parameters, and is
a field map in a binary format; it is automatically regenerated
if any parameter changes.

Note that maxR and maxZ are by default determined to be large
enough so that the field falls below tolerance; this can be quote
large.

This command is not placed into the geometry.

Named Arguments (#=cannot be changed in place cmd):
innerRadius   Inside radius of the coil (mm) #
outerRadius   Outside radius of the coil (mm) #
length        Length of the coil along z (mm) #
material      The material of the conductor (default=Cu) #
tolerance     The acceptable tolerance of the map. #
nSheets       Number of sheets used in the computation #
maxR          Maxmum r value for the map (automatically
determined by default). #
maxZ          Maxmum z value for the map (automatically
determined by default). #
dR            R interval between points of the map (automatically
determined by default). #
dZ            Z interval between points of the map (automatically
determined by default). #
filename      Filename for cache; deaults to name.dat. #
