## 6.80 tessellatedsolid

sensible values of the centerline coordinates are used.

Note that the radiusCut is important to reduce or eliminate
ambiguities in the global to centerline coordinate transform. It
can also be used to 'shield' the beamline to prevent particles
from taking unusual paths around the outside of beamline
elements.

Named Arguments:
x             The global x position of the start.
y             The global y position of the start.
z             The global z position of the start.
initialZ      The initial centerline z value.
rotation      The initial rotation of the centerline.
radiusCut     The radius cut for the initial segment (mm).
ring          Set nonzero to indicate a ring is present.

6.78 survey       survey command.

The survey command writes the coordinates of the front and rear
points of each element to a file (stdout if '-'). For most
elements the points written are the geometrical centers of their
front and rear faces. Elements are all objects put into the world
via the place command.

Entries are sorted by Zfront. The format of each line is:
command name Xfront Yfront Zfront Xrear Yrear Zrear

Coordinates can be global, centerline, or reference (if present).

Named Arguments:
coordinates   Coordinate type (global).
filename      Filename to write (-).
file          Synonym for filename.
coord         Synonym for coordinates.

6.79 tess         Alias for 'tessellatedsolid'.

6.80 tessellatedsolid construct a tessellatedsolid.

A tessellatedsolid is defined by facets on its surface. Each
facet is either a triangle or a planar quadrilateral, and the set
of surfaces must be closed.

The surface definition can be read from a file or from the
