## 6.81 test

input.file.Leading whitespace is removed, and '*' represents a
series of 0 or more non-blank chars. The first word in the line
describes its content:
#*     comment (ignored).
tess*  also ignored.
v*     a vertex containing 3 doubles (x,y,z in local coords).
V*     a vertex containing an integer and 3 doubles
(index,x,y,z).
f*     a facet, containing 3 or 4 indexes into the vertex array.
end*   end of input (or EOF).

The only requirement on order is that the vertices mentioned in a
facet line must already be present in the vertex array. Each
vertex is appended to the end of the vertex array; for VERTEX
lines, large gaps in the sequence of indices will waste memory.
The first vertex is entry 0.

This element must be placed (via the place command), and children
can be placed inside it.

Named Arguments:
filename      File to read for definition.
maxStep       The maximum stepsize in the element (mm)
material      The material of the tessellatedsolid
color         The color of the tessellatedsolid (''=invisible)
kill          Set nonzero to kill every track that enters.
debug         Set nonzero to display markers on surface.
file          Synonym for filename.

6.81 test         test random number seeds.

Test

6.82 timentuple   Construct an NTuple of tracks at a specified time.

A time NTuple generates an NTuple of every track at a specified
global time. It uses a linear interpolation in the step that
straddles the required time, so accuracy will suffer for large
steps. The NTuple uses centerline coordinates, if available.

This command is not placed into the geometry.

The standard NTuple fields are:
x,y,z (mm)
Px,Py,Pz (MeV/c)
t (ns)
PDGid (11=e-, 13=mu-, 22=gamma, 211=pi+, 2212=proton, ...)
EventID (may be inexact above 16,777,215)
