## 6.83 torus

TrackID
ParentID (0 => primary particle)
Weight (defaults to 1.0)

The following additional fields are appended for format=Extended,
format=asciiExtended, and format=rootExtended:
Bx, By, Bz (Tesla)
Ex, Ey, Ez (Megavolts/meter)
ProperTime (ns)
PathLength (mm)
PolX, PolY, PolZ (polarization)
InitX, initY, InitZ (initial position, mm)
InitT (initial time, ns)
InitKE (MeV when track was created)

Valid Formats (ignore case): ascii bltrackfile dummy for009
for009.dat root trackfile Extended asciiExtended rootExtended

Named Arguments (#=cannot be changed in place cmd):
time          The global time of the sampling (ns).
format        The NTuple format (see above for list).
filename      The filename of the NTuple.
file          Synonym for filename.
require       Expression which must be nonzero to include the
track (default=1) #
coordinates   Coordinates: global, centerline, or reference
(default=c).
referenceParticle Set to 1 to include the Reference Particle.

6.83 torus        construct a torus.

This is a direct interface to G4Torus. The major radius is in the
X-Y plane, with phi=0 along X.

This element must be placed (via the place command), and children
can be placed inside it.

Named Arguments:
innerRadius   The inner radius of the torus (mm)
outerRadius   The outer radius of the torus (mm)
majorRadius   The major radius of the torus (mm)
initialPhi    The initial phi around major radius (0 degrees).
finalPhi      The final phi around major radius (360 degrees).
maxStep       The maximum stepsize in the element (mm)
material      The material of the torus
color         The color of the torus (''=invisible)
kill          Set nonzero to kill every track that enters.
