## 6.85 trace

6.84 totalenergy  Print total energy deposited in selected volumes.

At end of run, prints the total energy deposited in the selected
volumes.

Volume-name patterns are like UNIX filename patterns: e.g.
'*[AB]*' matches any name containing an A or a B.

Tracks that are killed have their kinetic energy summed into the
volume where they were killed, unless they are killed because
they leave the World.

With ancestors=1, energy deposited in matching volumes is added
into their ancestors; energy deposited directly into those
ancestors is not summed into them unless their names also match.
That is, if A is a child of B, but only A matches the list of
volume-names, energy deposited into A will be reported in both A
and B, but energy deposited directly into B is ignored.

This command is not placed into the geometry.

Named Arguments:
volumes       Comma-separated list of Volume-Name patterns (*)
ancestors     Set nonzero to sum energy into all ancestor
(enclosing) volumess (0).
enclosing     Synonym for ancestors.
filename      Filename to write summary (stdout).
file          Synonym for filename.
verbose       Verbosity level (0).

6.85 trace        Specifies tracing of tracks.

Generates a separate NTuple for each track, with 1 row per step,
unless oneNTuple is nonzero (in which case all tracks are put
into a single NTuple). So format=ascii generates one file per
track with names generated by the pattern in filename (first %d
is replaced by event #, second %d is replaced by trackId); for
oneNTuple, the default filename is AllTracks.txt.

Note that without a trace command no traces are generated, so to
trace just the tune and reference particles include a trace
command with no arguments.

In collective tracking mode, oneNTuple must be nonzero, and the
entries will be generated only at collective steps (usually at a
specified deltaT).

Unlike other NTuple commands, the require expression applies to
entire tracks, not individual entries.

The standard NTuple fields are:
