## 6.86 trackcolor

x,y,z (mm)
Px,Py,Pz (MeV/c)
t (ns)
PDGid (11=e-, 13=mu-, 22=gamma, 211=pi+, 2212=proton, ...)
EventID (may be inexact above 16,777,215)
TrackID
ParentID (0 => primary particle)
Weight (defaults to 1.0)
The trace includes the following fields:
Bx, By, Bz (Tesla)
Ex, Ey, Ez (Megavolts/meter)

The following additional fields are appended for format=Extended,
format=asciiExtended, and format=rootExtended:
ProperTime (ns)
PathLength (mm)
PolX, PolY, PolZ (polarization)
InitX, initY, InitZ (initial position, mm)
InitT (initial time, ns)
InitKE (MeV when track was created)

Valid Formats (ignore case): ascii bltrackfile dummy for009
for009.dat root trackfile Extended asciiExtended rootExtended

Named Arguments (#=cannot be changed in place cmd):
nTrace        Number of tracks to trace.
format        Format of the NTuple (see above for list).
oneNTuple     Nonzero to put all traces into a single NTuple.
primaryOnly   Nonzero to trace only primary tracks.
traceTune     Nonzero to trace tune tracks (default=1).
filename      Filename (Ev%dTrk%d.txt or AllTracks.txt).
file          synonym for filename.
require       Expression which must be nonzero to trace the track
(default=1) #
coordinates   Coordinates: global, centerline, or reference
(default=c).

6.86 trackcolor   Alias for 'particlecolor'.

6.87 trackcuts    Specifies per-track cuts.

Applied to each track before tracking, and at each step.

NOTE: the physics command MUST come before trackcuts.

This command is not placed into the geometry.

Named Arguments:
