## 6.88 tracker

kill          List of particles to kill (comma separated).
keep          List of particles to keep (kill all others).
killSecondaries Set nonzero to kill all secondaries.
kineticEnergyCut Minimum K.E. to track (0 MeV).
kineticEnergyMax Maximum K.E. to track (infinite MeV).
maxTime       Maximum lab time to track (1000000 ns).
keepPrimaries Set nonzero to keep tracks with ParentID==0
regardless of other tests.
steppingVerbose Set nonzero to print kills (defaults to parameter
value).

6.88 tracker      Defines a tracker.

A tracker consists of several trackerplane-s and can fit a track
to wire hits and times in the trackerplanes. This is a simple
algorithm that does not handle backgrounds or multiple hits. It
assumes that every track hits each trackerplane at most once. It
is intended to be used to explore resolutions and the effects of
survey errors. A tracker is a logical combination of its
trackerplanes -- the tracker cannot be placed, but its
trackerplanes must be placed into the system.

The fitting algorithm used requires that all of its parameters
have comparable scales, so the 'scaleX', 'scaleXp', 'scalePtot',
and 'scaleT' arguments should be set to the approximate sigmas of
the tracker. They should be within a factor of 10 of the actual
values, but closer is better. At the end of fitting tracks a
summary is printed that flags each parameter with 'RESCALE' if
its scale is too different from its sigma (factor of 5 or more).

NOTE: if the tracker cannot measure Ptot, then 'scalePtot' MUST
be set to zero. If the tracker cannot measure T, then scaleT MUST
be set to zero. Parameters with zero scales are held fixed at
their true-track values.

NOTE: the trackerplane-s of a tracker MUST be placed in the order
that particles will hit them; the code does not sort them.
Usually this means that each place command of a trackerplane must
have a larger z value than the previous place command. They must
also come after the trackerZ value of the tracker command.

A tracker has 3 modes of operation:
true      Each track of each event is written to a
TrackerHits NTuple if it hits all trackerplanes;
the NTuple includes both the true track values
and the individual wire hits for each trackerplane.
fit       A track is fit to the wire hits from a previous
run, and the fit track is written to a TrackerFit
NTuple (includes true values).
ignore    Any track is ignored.

See the 'trackermode' command to control the mode of trackers.

The TrackerHits NTuple written in 'true' mode contains:
true_x, true_y, true_z, true_Px, true_Py, true_Pz, true_t,
true_PDGid, true_EventID, true_TrackID, true_ParentID,
true_Weight, ... plus 1 hit and 1 time per trackerplane.
(the first 12 are the same as a BLTrackFile.)

The TrackerFit Ntuple written in 'fit' mode contains:
x, y, z, Px, Py, Pz, t, PDGid, EventID, TrackID, ParentID,
Weight, ChisqPerDF, nDF, nHit, nIter, true_x, true_y, true_z,
true_Px,
true_Py, true_Pz, true_t.
(the first 12 are from the fit and are the same as a
BLTrackFile.)

The parameters of the fit are: x, y, dxdz, dydz, Ptot, time. You
must ensure that there are at least as many data points as free
parameters (scaleT=0 fixes time; scalePtot=0 fixes Ptot). Each
trackerplane with nonzero wireSpacing provides a data point; each
trackerplane with nonzero sigmaT provides a data point;
trackerplanes that measure both provide two data points. You must
have enough trackerplanes to meet this requirement, and must set
minHits large enough to meet it. The TrackerFit NTuple has a
field nDF that gives the number of degrees of freedom for the
fit, which is defined as (#DataPoints)-(#FreeParameters); it also
has nHit which gives the number of trackerplane-s hit.

Note the tracker can simulate survey errors -- see the
'trackerplane' command for details (each plane can have different
errors).

Both the true and the fit tracks are reported at reportZ, which
defaults to the Z position of the tracker.

Note that beamlossntuple and newparticlentuple will get many
entries per track when used in mode=fit -- the fit runs the track
many times through the tracker (30-100, up to maxIter).

NOTE: the trackermode command must preceed all tracker commands
in the input file, and each tracker command must preceed all of
its trackerplane commands. The trackerZ value must also preceed
all trackerplane-s, but reportZ can be equal to or anywhere after
trackerZ.

Note that each trackerplane must have a unique name. This means
you should either have a separate trackerplane command for each
one (with unique name), or use the rename= argument to the place
command (again with unique name). If you use groups for
trackerplane-s, use rename=+ in the group.

NOTE: This command does not work properly in collective tracking
mode.
