## 6.89 trackermode

Named Arguments:
trackerZ      The Z position of the tracker (Centerline, mm).
reportZ       The Z position at which fit tracks are reported
(Centerline, mm, default=trackerZ).
scaleX        Scale for X and Y (mm); default=1mm.
scaleXp       Scale for dxdz and dydz (radians), default=0.001.
scalePtot     Scale for Ptot (MeV), default=0. Set to 0.0 if
tracker cannot determine momentum.
scaleT        Scale for t (ns), default=0. Set to 0.0 if tracker
cannot determine time.
minPz         Minimum Pz for valid tracks (default=10 MeV/c)
minHits       Minimum number of hits for fitting (# planes).
tolerance     Track fitting tolerance (mm) (default=0.01 mm)
maxIter       Maximum iterations during fitting (default=200).
verbose       0=none, 1=result, 2=iterations, 3=detail,
default=0.
format        Format of output NTuple.
filename      Filename of output NTuple.
for009        Set nonzero to also output TrackerFit as
FOR009.Dat.
file          Synonym for filename.

6.89 trackermode  Sets mode for all trackers, manages track fitting.

USAGE: trackermode mode [file=...]
mode can be any of:
true     tracks true tracks (normal operation)
fit      fits tracks to previous 'true' output
both     does both true and fit at once
'fit' requires the filename argument to be the output of a
previous 'true' run (filename is ignored in other modes); each
tracker processes all of its tracks in the file. 'true' mode
simply denotes the standard G4beamline operation, and the
simulated tracks are taken to be the 'true' tracks of the system;
the response of the tracker(s) to these tracks is then simulated
in 'fit' mode. 'both' tracks a 'true' event, and then a fit is
peerformed in each tracker for which its first track hit all
trackerplane-s.

Note that in 'true' mode every track that hits all trackerplane-s
is considered, but in 'both' mode only the first track of the
event can be considered.

In fit mode, the filename argument MUST be different from the
parameter 'histoFile', because this run must not overwrite the
Root file from the previous (true) run.

One trackermode command controls the mode of all trackers. 'true'
mode is normal G4beamline operation, and is the same as if no
trackermode command was present.
