## 6.8 collective

mapFile       Filename for map (e.g. from TOSCA). #
exactComputation Set nonzero to use the exact computation without
any field map (0).

6.8 collective   Monitor collective computation

This command computes the means and sigmas related to the time
stepping in BLRunManager (global coordinates), generating a
TimeStep NTuple. If the simulation has multiple bunches, this
NTuple combines them all (and is thus almost useless).

This command can also generate field NTuple-s at specified points
in x,y,z -- unnamed parameters should be 'x,y,z' values for
monitoring E and B fields (global coordinates).

NOTE: This command must come AFTER other commands that compute
collective fields; otherwise stale field values will be used from
the previous time step. If deltaT is set > 0.0, this command will
put the RunManager into collective mode and set its deltaT;
otherwise the previous commands should do that, and this command
won't modify deltaT.

This command is not placed into the geometry.

Named Arguments:
deltaT        Time step (-1 ns).
format        Format of NTuples.
filenamePrefix Prefix of NTuple filenames.

6.9 corner       Implement a corner in the centerline.

The centerline is bent by a rotation. Every track that enters the
volume also gets rotated. The z value is for the corner and the
front face of the volume (if any). If the corner is paired with a
bending magnet or other mechanism to bend the beam, no volume
should be used.

NOTE: This command is self-placing, do not use the place command;
it also affects all following placements, and it cannot be issued
inside a group. If radius=height=width=0 then no volume is
associated with the corner, and a bending magnet should be placed
nearby to bend the particles around the corner. Normally the
bending magnet is placed before the corner, and is rotated by
half the bend angle. For a sector bend, it's usually best to use
the cornerarc command rather than this one.

NOTE: all placements before this command must have z values
before the corner, and all placements after this command must
have z values after the corner. Note also that the angle is
