## 6.90 trackerplane

Note that the geometry of the system must not change between a
'true' run and a 'fit' run. You can, however, make small
variations in fields to explore how errors in setting them will
affect the fitted tracks. The trackerplane command can simulate
survey errors.

NOTE: the trackermode command must preceed all tracker commands
in the input file.

Named Arguments:
filename      Filename to read for fitting tracks.
file          Synonym for filename.

6.90 trackerplane Construct a tracker plane.

A trackerplane belongs to a specific tracker, and represents one
measuring element of the tracker. While the term 'wire' is used,
a trackerplane can model any planar measuring device that
measures one dimension using equally spaced detectors that are
either on or off (hit or not hit). A trackerplane can be circular
(specify radius and possibly innerRadius) or rectangular (specify
height and width).

The wires are at angle theta from the vertical, so theta=0 means
vertical wires that measure x; theta=90 means horizontal wires
that measure y; theta=180 also measures x, but increasing x means
decreasing wire #.

Setting wireSpacing=0 means there are no wires, which is useful
for a trackerplane that models a scintillator used for track
timing (set sigmaTime >= 0 to indicate that).

sigmaTime>0 means this plane can measure the time of the track
with that resolution. A Gaussian random number is added to the
true track's time at this plane when reading the TrackHit NTuple.

Survey errors can be modeled using the err-arguments -- the
values they specify are applied during trackfitting (but not for
true tracks). errType: 'fixed' means error values given are the
actual values, 'gaussian' means error values are the sigma of a
Gaussian random number, 'rect' means error values are the
half-width of a uniform random number. The random number is
picked before the run begins; the random-number seed is set from
the clock so every run will have different random errors.

trackerplane has 3 modes:
true    The trackerplane reports the hit wire and time to
the tracker;
fit     The trackerplane reports the Chisq contribution of
the fit track distance to the true track's hit wire
center, plus survey errors (if any). The track time
