## 6.91 trap

also contributes to the chisq.
ignore  Any track is ignored.

NOTE: the trackerplane-s of a tracker MUST be placed in the order
that particles will hit them; the code does not sort them.
Usually this means that each place command of a trackerplane must
have a larger z value than the previous place command. They must
also come after the trackerZ value of the tracker command.

Named Arguments:
tracker       The tracker to which this plane belongs; REQUIRED.
radius        The radius of the circular tracker plane (mm).
innerRadius   The inner radius of the circular tracker plane (0
mm).
height        The height of the rectangular tracker plane (mm).
width         The width of the rectangular tracker plane (mm).
length        The length of the tracker plane (mm).
theta         Wire angle in X-Y plane (deg). 0=>x, 90=>y...
wireSpacing   Wire spacing (mm).
wireOffset    Wire # 0 offset (mm).
errType       Error type: fixed, gaussian, rect.
errTheta      Error in wire angle (deg).
errSpacing    Error in wire spacing (mm).
errOffset     Error in wire offset (mm).
sigmaTime     Sigma for timing plane (ns), default=-1.
maxStep       The maximum stepsize in the element (mm).
material      The material of the tracker plane.
color         The color of the tracker plane (''=invisible).

6.91 trap         construct a solid trapezoid with axis along z.

This is a direct interface to G4Trap. The trapezoid is
symmetrical left-right, but upper or lower width can be larger or
smaller.

This element must be placed (via the place command), and children
can be placed inside it.

Named Arguments:
height        The height of the solid trapezoid (mm)
upperWidth    The upper width solid trapezoid (mm)
lowerWidth    The lowerWidth of the solid trapezoid (mm)
Xul           X position of upper left corner (mm)
Xur           X position of upper right corner (mm)
Xll           X position of lower left corner (mm)
Xlr           X position of lower right corner (mm)
length        The length of the solid trapezoid (mm)
maxStep       The maximum stepsize in the element (mm)
material      The material of the trapezoid
color         The color of the trapezoid (''=invisible)
kill          Set nonzero to kill every track that enters.
