## 6.93 tubs

6.92 tube         Alias for 'tubs'.

6.93 tubs         construct a tube or cylinder with axis along z.

This is a direct interface to G4Tubs, which can implement a tube
or cylinder; either can subtend less than 360 degrees in phi.

This element must be placed (via the place command), and children
can be placed inside it.

Named Arguments:
innerRadius   The inside of the tube, 0.0 for cylinder (mm)
outerRadius   The outer radius of the tube or cylinder (mm)
initialPhi    The initial Phi value (deg; 0 for all)
finalPhi      The final Phi value (deg; 360 for all)
length        The length of the tube or cylinder (mm)
maxStep       The maximum stepsize in the element (mm)
material      The material of the tube or cylinder
color         The color of the tube or cylinder (''=invisible)
kill          Set nonzero to kill every track that enters.
radius        Synonym for outerRadius (mm)

6.94 tune         Tune a variable used as argument to other elements.

This command samples the Tune particle track at z0, samples it
again at z1, and varies its tune variable in order to bring the
expression to zero. The tune variable is the first positional
argument, and can be used in the argument expression(s) for
tunable arguments located after z0. Due to the simple solver
used, there should be an approximately linear dependence between
the tune variable and the expression. This is suitable for tuning
the By field of a genericbend or the maxGradient of a pillbox. At
each solver step the saved Tune particle is re-started from z0,
and when it reaches z1 the next step in the solver is taken.

Note that multiple tune commands can be used together, as long as
their z0-z1 regions are properly nested by at least 0.5 mm (i.e.
each pair of regions must either not overlap at all, or one must
be wholly contained in the other). This command can be
complicated to use; see the User's Guide for more description and
examples.

This command places itself into the geometry.
