## 6.96 virtualdetector

Named Arguments:
z0            The starting z position in CL coordinates.
z1            The ending z position in CL coordinates.
initial       Initial value of the variable 'name'
initialStep   Initial step (0 to disable tuning)
step          Synonym for initialStep
start         An expression that must be nonzero to start tuning
(default=1)
expr          The expression to tune to zero
tolerance     The tolerance for expr to be zero
maxIter       The maximum number of iterations (10).

6.95 usertrackfilter Construct a usertrackfilter that filters tracks via user
code.

...

Named Arguments:
radius        The radius of the circular element (mm).
innerRadius   The inner radius of the circular element (0 mm,
solid).
height        The height of the rectangular element (mm).
width         The width of the rectangular element (mm).
length        The length of the element (mm).
maxStep       The maximum stepsize in the element (mm).
material      The material of the element.
color         The color of the element (''=invisible).
filterName    Name of the UserTrackFilter.
filter        Synonym for filterName.
init          Initialization string passed to user setup().

6.96 virtualdetector Construct a VirtualDetector that generates an NTuple.

A VirtualDetector generates an NTuple of any track when it enters
the physical volume of the VirtualDetector. It may be placed via
multiple place commands (usually with a 'rename=det#' argument to
distinguish the different placements). If material is not
specified, it uses the material of the enclosing element. Every
placement creates an individual NTuple. For a circular
VirtualDetector give radius; for a rectangular one give height
and width; length is usually left at 1 mm, but can be set to
correspond to the length of a physical detector. The NTuple by
default uses centerline coordinates. The NTuple of the
virtualdetector can be included in an ntuple command by including
a pattern that matches its name in the 'detectors' argument to
the ntuple command. Note that must match the name as placed (i.e.
includes rename=), not the name given to this command. The
noSingles argument may be useful in this case to avoid a huge

NTuple of singles (an empty NTuple may be created).

This element must be placed (via the place command).

Note that secondary particles created within the virtualdetector
will not get an entry until they have taken one step. They are
guaranteed to do so.

The standard NTuple fields are:
x,y,z (mm)
Px,Py,Pz (MeV/c)
t (ns)
PDGid (11=e-, 13=mu-, 22=gamma, 211=pi+, 2212=proton, ...)
EventID (may be inexact above 16,777,215)
TrackID
ParentID (0 => primary particle)
Weight (defaults to 1.0)

The following additional fields are appended for format=Extended,
format=asciiExtended, and format=rootExtended:
Bx, By, Bz (Tesla)
Ex, Ey, Ez (Megavolts/meter)
ProperTime (ns)
PathLength (mm)
PolX, PolY, PolZ (polarization)
InitX, initY, InitZ (initial position, mm)
InitT (initial time, ns)
InitKE (MeV when track was created)

Valid Formats (ignore case): ascii bltrackfile dummy for009
for009.dat root trackfile Extended asciiExtended rootExtended

Named Arguments (#=cannot be changed in place cmd):
radius        The radius of the circular VirtualDetector (mm).
innerRadius   The inner radius of the circular VirtualDetector (0
mm, solid).
height        The height of the rectangular VirtualDetector (mm).
width         The width of the rectangular VirtualDetector (mm).
length        The length of the VirtualDetector (mm).
maxStep       The maximum stepsize in the element (mm).
material      The material of the VirtualDetector.
color         The color of the VirtualDetector (''=invisible).
noSingles     Set to 1 to omit the NTuple for singles.
format        NTuple format: (see above for list).
filename      filename ('' uses name to determine filename)
file          alias for filename
require       Expression which must be nonzero to include the
track (default=1) #
referenceParticle Set to 1 to include the Reference Particle.
coordinates   Coordinates: global, centerline, or reference
(default=c).
kill          Set to 1 kill all tracks after entering them into
NTuple(s).
