## 6.97 zntuple

6.97 zntuple      Generate an NTuple for each of a list of Z positions.

Generates an NTuple like a virtualdetector, but without a
physical volume. Tracks are forced to take steps within 2mm
surrounding each desired z position, and they are interpolated to
the desired z position. Each z position generates a separate
NTuple named Z123 (etc.). z accepts a list of z positions, and
zloop can generate a set of equally spaced z positions; both can
be used.

Each value in z and zloop can be an expression using double
constants and the usual C operators and functions.

This command places itself into the geometry.

The standard NTuple fields are:
x,y,z (mm)
Px,Py,Pz (MeV/c)
t (ns)
PDGid (11=e-, 13=mu-, 22=gamma, 211=pi+, 2212=proton, ...)
EventID (may be inexact above 16,777,215)
TrackID
ParentID (0 => primary particle)
Weight (defaults to 1.0)

The following additional fields are appended for format=Extended,
format=asciiExtended, and format=rootExtended:
Bx, By, Bz (Tesla)
Ex, Ey, Ez (Megavolts/meter)
ProperTime (ns)
PathLength (mm)
PolX, PolY, PolZ (polarization)
InitX, initY, InitZ (initial position, mm)
InitT (initial time, ns)
InitKE (MeV when track was created)

Valid Formats (ignore case): ascii bltrackfile dummy for009
for009.dat root trackfile Extended asciiExtended rootExtended

Named Arguments (#=cannot be changed in place cmd):
z             Comma-separated list of Z positions (mm)
zloop         Loop in z, first:last:incr (mm)
noSingles     Set to 1 to omit the NTuple for singles.
format        NTuple format (see above for list)
file          Output filename ('' uses name to determine
filename)
filename      Synonym for file
require       Expression which must be nonzero to include the
track (default=1) #
referenceParticle Set to 1 to include the Reference Particle.
coordinates   Coordinates: global, centerline, or reference
(default=c).

7 Examples
On Linux and Mac OS, the examples are found in the “examples” directory under the install directory.
On Windows, they are found there also, and a copy is placed into “Documents\G4beamline Examples”.

The annotated output from Example1 is given in Appendix 5.

README.txt:
G4beamline Examples.

Look at the comments in each input file.

Example1.g4bl

A simple first example. Puts a Gaussian beam into 4 detectors.

ExampleN02.g4bl

Implements the Geant4 example/N02.

FieldLines.g4bl

Displays field lines for 4 solenoids.

Study2Cooling.g4bl

Four cells of the Study 2 cooling channel (ca. 2003).

MultipleScattering.g4bl

A simple simulation of multiple scattering and ionization energy

loss in various materials.

TungstenTarget.g4bl

An 8 GeV proton beam on a tungsten target.

MICE_StageVI.g4bl

A simulation of the MICE beamline and cooling channel in Stage VI,

from August 2005. Includes field maps for the bending magnets and

realistic window profiles for the absorbers. This is the largest

and most realistic example.

Idealized_g-2.g4bl

A simulation of an idealized version of the BNL g-2 experiment.

100% polarized 3.094 GeV/c mu- circle in a 1.4513 T uniform B field,

while their spins precess, which affects the energies of their decay e-.

SpaceCharge.g4bl

A parallel-to-point quad triplet with space charge. With a bunch

charge of 1E10 the effects of space charge start to become visible;

with a bunch charge of 1E12 the focus is unrecognizable.

SampleMovie.g4bl

Example1.g4bl with a movie command added. Use movie.in with g4blmovie.

Movie.in

An input file for g4blmovie, works with SampleMovie.g4bl.
