## Pre- and post-processing

Being able to simulate charged-particle dynamics in time-dependent 3D electromagnetic field configurations is usually far from sufficient for serious accelerator and beam-line design. The simulation data must be analyzed, parameters must be scanned and typically a comparison must be made between different scenarios. GPT is accompanied by a number of pre- and postprocessing programs as well as interfaces to other software packages to ease this step in the design process. These tools are combined with GPT and integrated into the MS-Windows graphical user interface, GPTwin. GPT on Linux machines uses command-line versions of these programs. The typical data flow within GPTwin is shown in Figure 2. The following subsections describe the individual components in detail.

Figure 2: Typical data flow within GPTwin. GPTwin is the all-integrated MS-Windows user interface for GPT. It provides a standard editor with on-line help capabilities for editing the inputfile. Inputfiles can be run and combined with any number of pre- and post-processing tools. GPTwin is able to directly plot the output of GPT as well as the results of data analysis tools like GDFA. Any number of plots can be shown in separate windows within the GPTwin user interface. When more windows show different views of the same outputfile, the hierarchy between the different views always remains synchronized.

The GPT results are written to a binary file for off-line analysis and interpretation. This file is written in the General Datafile Format (GDF), a multi-purpose, hierarchical file format specifically designed for efficiently storing large quantities of numerical data. It allows the post-processing components to easily extract information. The GDF format is used throughout the GPT kernel, the analysis tools and the GPT elements to keep the code compact and efficient. As shown in figure 2, various conversion utilities are available to convert to and from the GDF format.

The main analysis program for GPT output is GDFA. It calculates macroscopic beam parameters as function of simulation time, position or any scanned parameter. Typical macroscopic quantities like emittance, bunch length, average energy and beam radius can be obtained. GDFA is capable of calculating many other useful quantities as well. When needed, the list of GDFA programs can be extended with custom code to calculate the beam parameter of interest. GDFA maintains the original hierarchy in the GDF file when more parameters are simultaneously scanned simultaneously.

The MR and GDFSOLVE utilities can be used to instruct GPT to run a sequence of simulations with one or more parameters varying. The MR program scans over a pre-defined multi-dimensional parameter range while GDFSOLVE automatically optimizes a design until user-defined criteria are met.
