## The GPT executable

A schematic of the GPT executable is shown in the figure below. The following subsections describe the individual components in detail.

Figure 1: Schematic of the GPT executable. The GPT executable starts by reading one or more ASCII inputfile(s) describing the simulation to perform. The inputfile specifies the initial particle distribution, the 3D electromagnetic field configuration (set-up), the required accuracy of the calculations and the output method. Standard expressions, functions and user- defined variables can be used for convenience. Optionally, a MR file (Multiple Run) can be used to automatically scan any number of parameters.

The initial particle distribution consists of a number of macro-particles, each typically representing a large number of elementary particles. Hammersley sequences are employed to minimize statistical errors due to the finite number of particles. Each projection of the initial distribution can be specified using the built-in particle generators or can be read from an external file. Complicated particle distributions can consist of any number of separate particle distributions, e.g. a beam with a halo or a mixture of different ion species each having their own distribution in position-momentum space.

The set-up defines the 3D electromagnetic field configuration as generated by the beam-line components. It can be composed of any number of built-in elements, external 2D or 3D field maps and user-defined expressions in custom elements. There is no limit to the number, location and orientation of the elements. The field-map elements can read electromagnetic field configurations calculated by external programs like TOSCA and the SUPERFISH set of codes. Measured field information can be used in the calculations as well. Furthermore, GPT users can easily write their own elements for specific configurations. The interface for writing custom elements is very broad and covers the development of user-defined electromagnetic field configurations, custom initial particle distributions, interfaces to other codes and additional differential equations. All GPT elements are developed in their own coordinate system and written in separate source files. These files are platform independent and allow users to freely exchange elements with each other without having to modify the GPT kernel. When an element is positioned in 3D space, the GPT kernel takes care of all required coordinate transformations.

The self-fields of the particles often form a crucial part of the electromagnetic fields through which these particles are tracked. Space-charge effects can be calculated using various depending on the type of simulation. The 3D space-charge routines include a fully 3D relativistic point-to-point interaction model, a fast hierarchical model and a very fast mesh-based PIC routine based on solving Poisson’s equation in the rest frame of the bunch. For the simulation of (semi)continuous beams a 2D space-charge model can be used calculating relativistic point-to-ray interactions. Space-charge effects in cylindrical symmetric beams can be modeled using a relativistic 2D point-to-circle routine.

The equations of motion for the macro-particles are solved relativisticly in the time domain using a 5th order embedded Runge-Kutta integrator with adaptive stepsize control. When required, the individual particle coordinates can be obtained with an accuracy of 10–10. The adaptive timestep mechanism modifies the stepsizes according to the gradients of the electromagnetic fields to ensure that all output satisfies the user- specified accuracy. Optionally, the equations of motion are combined with additional differential equations. This mechanism can be used to calculate beam-loading or FEL interaction completely self-consistently.

GPT has two available output modes: time and position output. Time output writes all particle coordinates at user specified time(s). Position output writes all particle coordinates passing any plane in 3D space. This output mode is also known as ‘nondestructive screen’ output. Time and position output can be freely mixed and any number of time and position outputs can be specified. Optionally, the electric and magnetic fields at the particle coordinates are also output, which greatly helps in understanding particle dynamics.
