## 2.1 Installation

2 Quick Start Guide
This section gives a quick overview of how to install and run G4beamline. It cannot discuss all the
subtleties involved in performing simulations. New users should note in particular section 4 on
important values that affect the accuracy, and section 8 on tips and techniques.

NOTE: The G4beamline distributions no longer include the HistoRoot program. An old version is
available at http://historoot.muonsinc.com.

G4beamline requires the Geant4 data needed by the physics list used in the simulation. These data are
placed into a directory named Geant4Data that is normally located in the user’s HOME directory (on
Windows it may be located in “C:\”). The first time you run G4beamline, the g4bldata program is run to
assist you in downloading these data. If you did not download all data initially, and find you need other
datasets later, you can access the download assistant from the Help page of the GUI or by running
g4bldata manually.
#### 2.1.1 Windows

Prerequisites:

Optional: the HistoRoot program http://historoot.muonsinc.com.

The distribution file is G4beamline-VERSION.msi, available from http://g4beamline.muonsinc.com.
Simply download it and execute it with administrator privileges. By default, it will install files into
“C:\Program Files (x86)\MuonsInc\G4beamline”, and place icons onto your Desktop and into the Start
menu. It will also place a copy of the G4beamlineExamples and the G4beamlineDocumentation into
“Documents\G4beamline Examples”. Delete the downloaded file after installing it.

The icons run the g4blgui program. See the README.txt file (Appendix 1) for more details.

To use the command-line programs, you must run g4bl via an absolute path. It can be run from either a
Cygwin bash window or from a cmd window; in a Cygwin bash shell you can do:

source “C:/Program Files (x86)/MuonsInc/G4beamline/bin/g4bl-setup.sh”
You may put this into your $HOME/.bash_profile. There is a similar g4bl-setup.csh. To run it in a cmd
window you must use its absolute path:

“C:\Program Files (x86)\MuonsInc\G4beamline\bin\g4bl” input.file […]

The first time you run G4beamline, it will launch a helper program (g4bldata) to download the required
Geant4 data files.

The Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL)
WSL is a new subsystem of Windows 10 that permits users to run Linux programs in a manner
integrated with Windows. For instance, this gives you the usual bash shell of Linux (or any other Linux
shell). If you enable WSL with an Ubuntu Linux kernel, you can run the Ubuntu version of G4beamline.

Note, however, if you want to use g4blgui and its event display, you must also be running an Xwindows server (e.g. Xming, https://sourceforge.net/projects/xming/).
#### 2.1.2 Linux (Intel)

Prerequisites:

Optional: the HistoRoot program http://historoot.muonsinc.com.

There are two distribution files:
G4beamline-VERSION-SLF64.tgz
built on Scientific Linux Fermi
G4beamline-VERSION-Ubuntu64.tgz
built on Ubuntu
Both are available from http://g4beamline.muonsinc.com. Simply download the appropriate one and untar it in your $HOME:

tar –xzf g4beamline-VERSION-*64.tgz
Note that SLF is derived from RedHat Enterprise Linux, and Ubuntu is derived from Debian; both may
work on other distributions.

Delete the downloaded tarball after expanding it.

You can construct an icon on your Desktop to run G4beamline:

g4beamline-VERSION-*64/bin/g4bl-icon
You can copy this icon into any menus of your desktop manager.

To use the command-line programs, you must add the G4beamline programs into your PATH:

source g4beamline-VERSION-*64/bin/g4bl-setup.sh
You may put this into your $HOME/.bash_profile. There is a similar g4bl-setup.csh.

The first time you run G4beamline, it will launch a helper program (g4bldata) to download the required
Geant4 data files.
#### 2.1.3 Mac OS X (Intel)

Prerequisites:

Optional: the HistoRoot program http://historoot.muonsinc.com.

The distribution file is G4beamline-VERSION.dmg, available from http://g4beamline.muonsinc.com.
Simply download it, open it, and drag the G4beamline icon into your /Applications folder. Drag the
G4beamlineDocumentation and G4beamlineExamples folders to your desktop, if desired. Then eject the
installer disk image and move the downloaded file to the trash. As usual, you can then drag the
application icon from /Applications to the Dock.

If you want to use the command-line programs, you must add the G4beamline programs into your
PATH:

source /Applications/G4beamline.app/Contents/Resources/bin/g4bl-setup.sh
You may put this into your $HOME/.bash_profile. There is a similar g4bl-setup.csh.
