## 2.2 Initial Test

The first time you run G4beamline, it will launch a helper program (g4bldata) to download the required
Geant4 data files.

After installing G4beamline, the first thing to do is to run the regression tests. Run the g4blgui program
via either an icon or the command-line, then select Tools/DoRegressionTests from the menu. All tests
should pass, though some will be omitted (which is both expected and harmless). If you prefer, you can
run the g4bltest program from the command-line (after adding the distribution’s bin directory into your
PATH).

Next, try it on some of the example files. From the GUI, use File/Open or click on the Browse button
and navigate to the G4beamlineExamples directory and select Example1.g4bl (on Windows, go to
“Documents\G4beamlineExamples”). Clicking on the Run button should execute the Example1
simulation (takes just a few seconds to simulate 1000 events). Try selecting the best viewer, select (say)
99 events/run, and click Run again to see the OGLSQt display of the system and those events; use the
mouse to rotate and zoom the display; Push StartRun from the toolbar on the left to run and display the
next block of events.
### 2.3 Using the G4beamline Command Line

On Linux and Mac OS X, the command line is the traditional way to run programs. On Windows this is
also possible: you can install the Cygwin environment first (http://www.cygwin.com) and use its bash
shell, or you can use the Windows cmd. You can execute the G4beamline GUI in all environments via
the command g4blgui executed from the install directory via an absolute path.

The bare g4bl command specifies the input file, plus whatever additional parameters are needed (see the
param command). Its syntax is:
g4bl input.file name1=value1 name2=value2 ...

Here input.file is the filename of the file describing the simulation (‘-‘ means stdin), and name1 and
name2 are parameters to be passed to the program or to input.file.
The g4bl program knows how to find the Geant4Data directory containing the physics data files. Note
that the g4bl program relies on being executed via an absolute pathname, so the distribution bin
directory should be put into your PATH (or you can manually type the full path).
In addition, the g4bl command arguments can contain commands to be interpreted before reading the
input.file. These are interpreted in the order given, after all the parameters on the command-line are
defined. If the command has arguments, it must be quoted because of the spaces between arguments.
The usual commands this is used for are eventcuts (used by g4blgui) and movie (used by users to add the
movie NTuples to an existing simulation):
g4bl input.file movie name1=value1 name2=value2 ...
For visualization, the viewer.def file is looked for in the current directory, then in the directory from
G4BL_DIR in your environment, then in the distribution determined from the absolute path.
