## 2.4 Companion Programs for Plotting

G4beamline has two modes of operation: visualization and tracking. If the parameter viewer has been set
to anything other than none, it will run in visualization mode, which displays an image of the simulated
system (as specified in the viewer.def file for the viewer specified). For viewer=none (the default),
G4beamline will run in tracking mode. In visualization mode any NTuples defined in the input.file will
not be written to files. The simplest and most common way to invoke visualization mode is to put an
argument viewer=best onto the command line, or select a viewer in the GUI. See section 2.8 for a list of
the supported visualization drivers.

A very useful trick is to run G4beamline interactively, just to issue help and list commands:
g4bl –
cmd: help
cmd: help beam
cmd: list materials
You may find it useful to keep this open in one window while you edit your input.file in another
window.

Another useful trick is to add “steppingVerbose=1” to the command line. This will print one line per
physics step, so you can see precisely what happens during the simulation. This is very verbose, so you
want to limit the number of events to some small number (or type ^C to stop it). The prints are about
120 characters wide by default, so it’s best to do this in a wide window. You can change the information
printed, see section 3.2.1.

A large number of useful tips and techniques are described in section 8.

There are two companion programs that can be used to generate plots from G4beamline NTuples, other
Root files, and ASCII files (.csv or columns):
Historoot
is an old program that is simply a large Root macro. It is available at
http://historoot.muonsinc.com. HistoRoot is deprecated.
Allplot
is a Python3 program to generate plots. It is available at http://allplot.muonsinc.com/.
#### 2.4.1 The HistoRoot Program (deprecated)

HistoRoot is available at http://historoot.muonsinc.com. It requires Root to be installed. Moreover, for
reasonable efficiency on all but the smallest files, it must be compiled with the version of Root that is
being used – this is an advanced topic that makes it difficult for most users to install.

HistoRoot is deprecated because the pre-compiled version is based on a 32-bit version of Root, which
modern OSs may not be able to run. It has not been built or tested with more modern versions of Root.

While everything HistoRoot does can be done via Root commands and C++ code, the HistoRoot
program makes it unnecessary to know Root and C++, and guides you through most common tasks.
HistoRoot can read multiple Root files (TFile), and can generate plots from multiple TNtuple–s in them.
It can also read ASCII files (in either .csv or column format) and convert them to TNtuple-s for plotting
(see the Help for details on the ASCII file format; a structured comment can associate names to the
columns).

HistoRoot was inspired by the HistoScope program [3], though its user interface is completely different.
Having a simple GUI to generate plots and histograms is quite useful, and having sliders that
interactively impose cuts on the histogram is a great convenience.
#### 2.4.2 The AllPlot Program

AllPlot is available at http://allplot.muonsinc.com/. It is a Python3 program to generate plots from
ASCII files (,csv or columns). If Root and its Python3 interface pyroot are installed, it can also read
TNtuples from Root files. AllPlot requires these Python3 modules: numpy, matplotlib, tkinter; optional
modules: pyroot, scipy, pandas. If scipy is installed you can fit functions to plots. If pandas is installed,
reading ASCII files is significantly faster.

AllPlot can display these types of plots:
Selection
A simple data plot that permits selecting an interval of the file for all other plots
Simple Data
A simple XY plot of one column vs Time or N
Histogram
A histogram of an expression involving the data fields, with optional weights and
errorbars
XY
An XY plot of expressions involving the data fields.
FFT
An FFT of an expression involving the data fields.
Allan Deviation A plot of an expression involving the data fields.
Quad
Four plots of one data field: Data, FFT, Histogram, Allan Deviation.
The Histogram and XY plots also have an optional Boolean expression (‘cut’) that determines which
events (rows) are entered into the plot.
