## 3.11 Tuning the Beamline

### 3.10 Random Number Generator

G4beamline uses the default Geant4 random number generator (which is HepJamesRandom from
CLHEP [2] – see the CLHEP documentation for details). It is an excellent pseudo-random number
generator that essentially guarantees no repeat sequences when seeded by any integer between 0 and 900
million. At the start of each event, G4beamline seeds the random number generator with the event
number. This permits the user to submit multiple jobs in parallel with confidence, as long as the beam
command arguments are arranged so no two jobs run events with the same event numbers – quite
effective when using a Linux cluster. This also permits the user to re-run the same events (as long as the
input file remains unchanged – the slightest change can cause tracking to use a different number of
random numbers, and thus the runs of the same event number won’t be the same). A good use of this last
capability is to find an “outlier” event in some histogram, determine its event number (via narrow cuts in
historoot) and re-run it with visualization to see what actually happened.

Note that due to their internal designs, Root NTuples cannot precisely represent event numbers larger
than 16 million (a float with 24 bits of mantissa). This does not affect the ability to handle larger
datasets, it just means that the event numbers will be rounded to a 24-bit mantissa. ASCII formats for
track NTuples do not suffer from this limitation.

Just like a real beamline, a simulated beamline must be tuned to maximize transmission and achieve
various desired characteristics. G4beamline is not intended for the design of beamlines, but rather is best
used for their evaluation. Conventional beam optics design programs can be used to determine the
beamline elements and their parameters. These programs, however, usually make approximations and
ignore many subtle effects that G4beamline implements (e.g. fringe fields, non-Gaussian multiple
scattering tails, energy loss straggling, hadronic interactions in collimators and other apertures, nonGaussian tails in beam profiles, etc.). The result is that just as in the real world, the design programs give
only approximate values.

So two methods of tweaking the tune are provided:
1. The reference command can tune its referenceMomentum in order to make the reference particle
have a specified tuneMomentum at a specified tuneZ position (centerline coordinates). This is
most useful for a beamline with material that induces a significant energy loss in the reference
particle, such as muon cooling channels.
2. The tune command can be used to tune any tunable argument to any set of elements. This
includes the By field argument of genericbend and idealsectorbend, and the maxGradient
argument of pillbox.
See the online help, or section 6, for details about these commands. Tests 29-32 verify the operation of
these tunes, and provide working examples.

To aid the user in fine tuning the beamline, g4beamline implements the ability to track a “Tune” particle
and a “Reference” particle before tracking the beam (both are controlled by the reference command).
These particles are tracked with all stochastic processes disabled, and nominally go right down the
centerline of the beam. The Tune particle is used to tune all desired beamline elements, and the tuning
process often forces it to be tracked multiple time through sections of the beamline; after tuning is

completed then the Reference particle is tracked to give a clean readout of the reference trajectory, and
computation of the reference coordinates (if used).

The Tune particle can be used to:
1. Automatically set the timing of RF cavities so the Reference particle arrives at the desired RF
phase.
2. Automatically set the gradient of RF cavities so the desired acceleration of the reference particle
is achieved.
3. Automatically set the field of bending magnets so the Reference particle is parallel to the
centerline downstream of the magnet.
4. Automatically determine the initial momentum of the Reference particle so that it has a specified
momentum at some later point in the beamline.
Unfortunately, this method cannot be used to tune the position of bending magnets (because of their
fringe fields, the center of a bending magnet must normally be offset by a small distance downstream of
the corner in order to make the Reference particle go right down the centerline after the magnet).

As an example, consider tuning the By value of a genericbend:

reference referenceMomentum=200 particle=mu+ beamZ=0.0

tune B1 z0=100 z1=3000 initial=-0.6500 step=0.01 expr=Px1/Pz1 \

tolerance=0.000001

genericbend B fieldWidth=500 fieldHeight=500 fieldLength=500 \

ironWidth=800 ironHeight=800 ironLength=500 \

fieldMaterial=Vacuum

place B z=2000 rename=B1 rotation=Y15 By=B1

corner C z=2000 rotation=Y30

The tune command specifies to tune the value “B1” so that at Z=3000 the expression “Px1/Pz1” will be
zero to within the tolerance of 0.000001. That is, that the Reference particle be parallel to the centerline
within a microradian. The genericbend named “B1” uses the tune variable “B1” as its By argument
value. What happens is that when the Tune particle reaches z0=100, it is saved and tracked to z1=3000
(which goes through the genericbend B1). When the Tune particle reaches z1=3000, the expr “Px1/Pz1”
is evaluated, and if it is within tolerance of zero the tuning is complete. If it is out of tolerance, a simple
linear solver is used to update the value of the variable B1, and the saved track from z0=100 is retracked to z1=3000 and the process is repeated. If the process does not converge with 10 attempts, the
tuning fails and the program exits; information about each step is written to stdout.

The other tune procedures are similar, in that the Tune particle track is saved upstream of the region to
be tuned, and downstream of the region its properties are used to modify a variable that affects the
tuning, and the saved track is re-tracked until the result is within tolerance.

In practice, it is often necessary to use multiple tune commands. They must be properly nested so each
tuning region is either disjoint from the others, or is wholly contained in one or more other regions
(separation of ~0.01 mm is usually adequate). For instance, in a muon-cooling channel with bending
magnets and RF cavities it is probably necessary to tune the reference momentum, the bending magnets,
and the RF gradient(s).

Note that g4beamline can only tune based on the Tune particle, and can only tune tunable arguments to
certain commands. These limitations are due to technical details of the implementation, and cannot
