## 3.12 The Geant4 User Interface

easily be relaxed. No aspect of the geometry can be tuned via the Tune particle. Note this also does not
include tuning quadrupoles to achieve a specified focus, because that would require tracking many beam
particles and tuning to achieve a specified distribution. Because g4beamline can be easily scripted,
however, it is possible to do this manually via scripts or an external program. Such an external method
can tune any parameter or argument to any element, including geometry. See sections 8.18 and 8.21 for
details.

Examples: The program triplet.sh in the examples directory focuses a quad triplet for a point-to-point
focus. In the test directory, test29, test30, test31, test32, and test35 verify the tuning of each of the above
quantities.

Geant4 has its own command line processing and user interface. For the most part this is not used in
G4beamline. Some Geant4 commands can be simply placed in the input.file because all input lines
beginning with “/” are interpreted as Geant4 commands; they are executed immediately upon being
encountered in the input.file. In most cases, that is not what is needed, because the commands must be
deferred until the geometry has been set up – see the g4ui command for that.

In g4blgui, the graphical user interface has a pair of hidden toolbars that assist you in running Geant4
commands. The toolbar on the left has a small cross-hatched region above the number of events per
image; if your right-click there, a menu pops up with two choices: one will display the scene tree, some
help, and history, and the other displays both Output and an entry field from which you can interactively
run Geant4 commands. This is rarely needed.

The viewer.def file contains Geant4 commands used to initialize and use the various visualization
drivers. The selected section is automatically invoked when visualization is specified via the viewer=…
argument to the command line.
### 3.13 Event Time Limit

Every event is subject to a per-event time limit. This is controlled by the parameter eventTimeLimit,
which defaults to 30 (seconds), but can be set by the param command. As long as the program is taking
physics steps, this time limit will cause the current event to be killed and the next event to be simulated
(restarting the time limit). In case the code gets into an infinite loop, an alarm is set at the start of each
event for eventTimeLimit+10, and if this fires, the entire program will be aborted (recovery is not
possible); this prevents it from exhausting your CPU allocation on a cluster.

Note that systems with stable particles and electromagnetic traps can run literally forever. You may not
think your system has this property, but low energy delta rays (e-) can surprise you. Note also that
putting a medium- or high-energy electron or photon into a block of material can generate many
thousands of secondaries, which can take a very long time to track.

A different type of time limit is implemented via the maxTime argument to the trackcuts command; it is
a limit on the global time in the simulated world.
