## 3.15 Event and Track Numbering (EventID, TrackID)

### 3.14 Wall Clock Limit

An additional processing limit is determined by the parameter wallClockLimit. It defaults to -1, indicting
an infinite time limit. Setting it to a positive value will limit the run time to that many seconds. This is
most useful on a supercomputer where jobs are limited by wall clock time. Note that it can take several
seconds to several minutes to close up, so the value of the G4beamline parameter should be suitably
smaller than the limit of the job. This limit is checked only between events, which is another reason it
should be smaller than the job limit.

EventID is intended to identify a particular event (which may have multiple tracks). In G4beamline,
each beam track is a separate event. For internally generated beams, EventID is incremented for each
beam track and is thus unique within a given run. For beams read from external files, the assignment of
EventID-s to tracks is contained in the file – this means that multiple events can have the same EventID,
and that EventID-s might not be monotonically increasing.

Moreover, NTuple-s use float-s to hold each data item, and a float has only 24 bits of mantissa. This
implies that any event number ≥ 16,777,216 will be truncated. This applies to both reading and writing
Root files. Two workarounds avoid this truncation for many cases:
• BLTrackFile format (ASCII) avoids the truncation internally, both reading and writing.
• Commands that generate a track NTuple will map format=ascii to format=bltrackfile. This
includes: beamlossntuple, newparticlentuple, timentuple, virtualdetector, zntuple.
The result is that this truncation of EventID occurs only for Root NTuples and in the ntuple command;
neither of these can be avoided without massive changes that adversely affect users.

TrackID is intended to identify a track within an event. For internally generated beams the primary track
has TrackID=1, but for beams read from external files the assignment of TrackID to tracks is contained
in the file – this means that multiple tracks with identical EventID-s can have the same TrackID-s.

Moreover, secondary tracks can be generated during the simulation of an event, and the TrackID-s for
them can potentially conflict with TrackID-s read from a file. By default, secondary TrackID-s are
assigned starting at 1001 (see secondaryTrackID of the beam command). If a beam track from an
external file has a TrackID ≥ secondaryTrackID, a warning will be printed. For beam files containing
TrackID-s ≥ 1001, setting secondaryTrackID in the beam command can avoid both the potential
confusion and the many warnings.
### 3.16 Signals

G4beamline responds to signal SIGUSR1 by flushing all NTuples to disk. So for a long job you can look
at intermediate results.

G4beamline responds to signal SIGUSR2 by closing up and exiting cleanly. In each worker this is
detected between events. This is especially useful on some supercomputers, as SIGUSR1 and SIGUSR2
are the only signals users can send to the application; all others cause immediate termination without
saving results.
