## 3.1 Particle tracking in simulations

3 Basic Concepts
Any physical component of the simulation is called a beamline element, or just an element. Every
element inherently has a geometrical shape and a material; some elements also have electromagnetic
fields associated with them. Some elements are quite simple, merely defining a box or tube made of
some material; other are quite complex, defining in detail the construction and electromagnetic fields of
a complicated object such as an RF cavity.

Elements can often be nested inside each other; any element can be placed inside another element, but
not all elements can act as the parent of others (in general, simple elements can be parents, complex ones
cannot; most elements that generate an electromagnetic field cannot be parents). The notes and help for
each element describe whether or not it can be the parent to other elements. This is the natural way
Geant4 builds the geometry hierarchically: a “daughter” volume is said to be placed into its “mother” or
“parent” volume (every element is also a volume, perhaps several volumes). The “World” volume is the
ancestor of all volumes, and in G4beamline the World volume automatically grows to hold everything
that is placed into it. In G4beamline, individual elements have their own material(s), and when a
daughter is placed inside a parent, the daughter’s material applies inside the daughter, and the parent’s
material applies inside the parent outside any daughters; many elements use their parent’s material by
default.

G4beamline attempts to model the simulated world in as simple and straightforward manner as possible,
so in most cases a single object you might place into a real beamline will be represented as a single
beamline element in the program. So, for example, a genericbend element represents a (generic) bending
magnet and its field; the genericbend command defines an individual magnet type, including all details
of both its geometry and field; each placement of the magnet puts the geometrical object into the
simulation and also generates the magnetic field appropriate to the magnet. Other elements behave
similarly.

In the Geant4 toolkit, only simple geometrical shapes are available, and complicated objects must be
built up from cylinders, boxes, etc. In G4beamline there is a rather large list of pre-defined elements that
are much more complicated, such as an entire RF cavity (including time-dependent E- and B-fields,
optional windows, etc.), or a complete absorber assembly (modeled after the absorbers of the MICE
experiment, suitable for neutrino factory cooling channel simulations). G4beamline includes simple
pipes, cylinders, spheres, boxes, extruded polygons, polycones, and tessellated solids, so you can build
up complicated objects from them; in general, it is both easier and better to use the pre-defined elements
whenever they are suitable for your needs. In cases where the pre-defined elements are not sufficient, it
is possible to add additional elements to the program (this requires C++ programming and the
installation of the complete G4beamline build environment – see BUILD.txt in the distribution and the
doxygen documentation of the classes).

The accuracy of a simulation of tracking particles through a system depends primarily on how realistic
the simulation is. This has many aspects:
• How accurately the geometry of the simulation matches the real geometry
• How accurately the real electromagnetic fields are modeled in the simulation
