## 3.2 Units

• How accurately the material properties of the real objects are modeled in the simulation
• How accurately the modeled beam distributions match the real beam
• How accurately the program tracks particles
• How accurately the implementations of physical processes match the real world
• Etc.
While G4beamline provides facilities for the user to specify most of these, and gives them reasonable
default values, it is really the user’s responsibility to ensure that the results of a simulation are accurate
enough to be useful.

In G4beamline, Geant4 particle tracking is used directly with the tracking-accuracy parameters of
Geant4 settable by the user (see section 3.2.2).

In G4beamline, all physical sizes and dimensions are specified in millimeters, just as in Geant4. Most
other units are as in Geant4, except rotation angles are in degrees and EM fields are in Tesla and
MegaVolts/meter. The units of all arguments to all commands are given in section 6 of this document
and in the output from “help commandname”.
### 3.3 Geometry

As in Geant4, geometry in G4beamline is specified at the element level and in the placement of
elements. Each element has an inherent shape and size, which are usually parameterized, that determine
the basic geometry of the element in isolation. Elements can be placed into the simulated World, or into
other elements placed into the world, with specified geometrical relationships consisting of both
rotations and offsets relative to the parent’s coordinates. This will become obvious when you look at the
various element definition commands (e.g. the box and tubs1 commands), and the place command.

Because of the way Geant4 does tracking, there are restrictions on the geometrical intersections of
elements:
• Every daughter element must be wholly contained in its parent
• No sibling elements can intersect each other in any way
This results in a strict hierarchical arrangement of element volumes, with the World volume as the root
and outermost volume from which all other volumes are descended. The World volume, and the group
element, will automatically expand to the size required to hold all daughter elements placed into them.

G4beamline has a geometry test that will verify these requirements for points distributed on the surfaces
of every element. Due to round off in tracking, the geometrical intersections have a default accuracy of
10 microns; the geometry test has a default tolerance of 2 microns; in practice these are usually
reasonable values, but they can be changed when required by simulations at a different scale.

Note that the Geant4 toolkit has “logical volumes”, “physical volumes” and “placements”. In
G4beamline, these are not visible to the user; elements are modeled as single objects, and you simply
place the objects where they belong, keeping in mind the above requirements on intersections. The C++

1 “Tubs” is the name Geant4 uses for a tube or a cylinder (a tube with innerRadius=0).
