## 3.4 Coordinates

code implementing each element deals with the Geant4 details, of course. Unlike Geant4, in G4beamline
an element that generates an electromagnetic field is a single object that includes both its geometrical
volume(s) and its field.

An additional limitation of the geometry in G4beamline is the requirement that any element that is to be
the parent of other elements be placed after the children are placed into it. Once a given element has
been placed (anywhere), it can no longer be used as the parent of other elements.

There are four types of coordinates used in G4beamline:
1. Global coordinates
2. Local coordinates
3. Centerline coordinates
4. Reference coordinates

All coordinate systems are Cartesian, with axes labeled X,Y,Z,T. For geometrical placement, T is
irrelevant (but it is needed during tracking). X,Y,Z are always right handed, usually with the +Z
direction in the nominal direction of the beam, X is normally beam left, and Y is normally up.
#### 3.4.1 Global Coordinates

Global coordinates are merely the local coordinates of the World volume – the outermost physical
volume of the simulation, which defines the entire world known to the program. All beamline elements
and physical objects of the simulation are contained within the world volume. Note that the World
volume automatically expands to hold any elements placed into it, so the user need not be concerned
with how large it is. Any particle that reaches an edge of the World volume is killed right there.

Tracking is performed using global coordinates, and electromagnetic fields are always determined using
global coordinates (but they are specified using the local coordinates of their element; each placement of
an element into the simulation includes the local Û global coordinate transformations needed).
#### 3.4.2 Local Coordinates

There is a set of local coordinates for each and every element. If the element has an associated field, the
field of the element is specified in local coordinates, and the program automatically keeps track of the
global Û local coordinate transforms required for each placement of the element (including rotations for
vector fields).

Whenever an element is placed inside a parent element (e.g. a group or a box), the parent’s local
coordinates are used in the place command, except for the world volume. When placing an element into
the World volume you can specify either Centerline coordinates (the default) or global coordinates (the
local coordinates of the parent, here the World volume).
#### 3.4.3 Centerline Coordinates

Centerline coordinates are intended to represent the nominal centerline of a beamline, with the Z axis
running down the center of the beamline, the X axis is beam left, and the Y axis is up. This includes
corners generated by bending magnets. The centerline coordinates are initially identical to the global

coordinates, but the start, corner, and cornerarc commands will change that (each bending magnet is
normally immediately followed by a matching corner or cornerarc command). By default, elements
placed into the World volume use centerline coordinates to specify the placement, but global coordinates
can be used if desired. Centerline coordinates apply only to the World volume. They are piecewiselinear, and inside bending magnets they will differ from the theoretical reference-orbit coordinates
commonly used in accelerator physics; the cornerarc command will approximate reference-orbit
coordinates by using three corners chosen to yield the same length along Z as the reference-orbit
coordinates have along the arc. Note that the corner and cornerarc commands cannot have an angle
greater than 90º; if necessary, this limit can be worked around by using two commands in a row with
half the desired angle.

In X and Z, centerline coordinates correspond to what a surveyor might draw on the floor – a piecewiselinear centerline along which the various beamline elements will be placed. Note that just like a real
beamline, in G4beamline the fields of bending magnets must be adjusted (“tuned”) so that the desired
reference particle will travel along the centerline of the beamline. In general, the fringe fields of bending
magnets will require them to be offset slightly from their nominal position relative to a corner of the
centerline. See section 8.18 for a description of how to place and tune bending magnets.

If your input.file has no start, corner, or cornerarc commands, then the centerline coordinates will be
the same as the global coordinates, everywhere.

Note that in the input file, each start, corner, or cornerarc command affects the centerline coordinates
immediately. This means that all elements to be placed between a given pair of corners must be put into
the input file between those corner commands. If you attempt to place an object using a Z position in
front of a previous corner or cornerarc, or behind a following one, it will almost surely not do what you
intend. Because of this, it is quite difficult to place any element inside a bending magnet using centerline
or global coordinates; the best way to do that is to use the genericbend object as the parent for the
placement.

Because centerline coordinates can only apply when placing elements into the World volume, bending
magnets must normally be placed into the World volume, not into a group or other parent volume.

NOTE: the transform from global to centerline coordinates must be performed at the start of tracking
each particle. This transform can be ambiguous in certain regions near corners – see the figure at left (in
which the heavy black line is the centerline with 2 corners and 3
segments): the blue and green ambiguities are minor, because they
involve adjacent regions, but the red one is serious because it involves
non-adjacent segments; a ring can be much worse. The yellow regions
appear to belong to no segment, and are simply assigned to the next
downstream segment. The tracking of particles handles the change of
centerline segments naturally, moving from segment to segment in
order, but any jump or start must deal with the ambiguities (e.g. the
initial point of beam particles or secondaries). The solution is to
specify a radiusCut for every start, corner, and cornerarc command
(this is a limit on a particle’s radial distance from the centerline,
indicated by the dashed lines in the figure). This removes the serious

ambiguities, and the remaining minor ones are resolved by using the earliest region of the centerline for
which the global coordinate point is inside the radiusCut. Most beamlines have apertures that can be
used to determine an appropriate radiusCut in each segment of the centerline. If no radiusCut is
specified the ambiguities can become so bad that they prevent the use of centerline coordinates,
especially if there are many corners, large angles, or if the tune command is used (which “jumps” the
tune particle); simulating a ring may not work at all without a radiusCut (and needs the ring argument to
the start command, which assists in resolving the ambiguities unique to a ring).

#### 3.4.4 Reference Coordinates

Reference coordinates are the usual coordinates used by accelerator physicists, with the Z axis along the
reference orbit, X to the beam left, and Y up. In G4beamline, the actual track of the reference particle is
used for the Z axis. As the reference track is stepwise linear between the physics steps of the tracking, it
is usually necessary to specify a rather small maxStep (often 10 mm is about right). Note these
coordinates can be used only for output; objects cannot be placed using them, and tracking always uses
global coordinates.

As an example, consider a system having a uniform By = 8 T with vacuum everywhere, and a Gaussian
beam injected with Py = 0 centered on the +Z axis; there is a particlefilter to limit the number of turns
each particle can take. Each particle (including the reference particle) traces 6½ circles that lay right on
top of each other. When using global coordinates for the trace, the circles are quite evident; using
reference coordinates, the tracks are sinusoids (see figures below).

Global Coordinates view – Z vs. X
