## 3.6 Materials

If both a rotation and an offset are specified when placing an element, the rotation occurs first, then the
offset. This makes sense, as the location of the object’s local origin is specified when placing objects
(for most objects the local origin is at its geometrical center).

When the parent is placed with a rotation and/or an offset, the relationship between daughter and parent
remains unchanged, so the effect on the daughter is cumulative, all the way back to the World volume.

When used in a corner or cornerarc command, the rotation is relative to the previous centerline
coordinates. When placing into the World volume using centerline coordinates, the rotation is relative to
the current centerline coordinates (as is natural). So, for example, one can simply place genericquad
elements using centerline coordinates without rotation or offset and the nominal beam centerline will go
right down their center.

Note: this is quite different from the way the Geant4 toolkit itself specifies rotations and placements.

Every physical object inherently is constructed out of some material. G4beamline uses the Geant4
methods of specifying materials. The Geant4 version of the NIST database is available, and is used to
define any material that is not already defined (as long as it is known to the database). This database
includes all elements with Z<=98 plus a rather large list of other materials, including most of the ones
commonly used in simulations. See “help material” for details (or the material command in section 4
below). Additional materials can be defined as needed, via the material command, but that is needed
only for unusual materials or gases with nonstandard density. The Geant4 NIST database prepends
“G4_” to all material names, but in G4beamline that prefix is optional (G4_Al and Al are the same
material, aluminum from the NIST database).

Every element command has a material argument (or similar) to set the material for the physical object
(some elements have more than one material parameter). In many cases, the default is that of the parent
volume, but refer to the individual command descriptions for the actual default values. The material of
the World volume is determined by the parameter worldMaterial, which defaults to Vacuum.

Materials defined by the material command can be used to filter particle tracks. That is, the user can
specify which types of particles will be killed whenever they enter any object made of this material. The
arguments relevant to this are keep, kill, and require; keep and kill are lists of particle names, but require
is an expression in terms of track variables, so quite complex filters can be constructed. For example, in
a simulation of a neutrino source, it may be desirable to kill every non-neutrino track that hits a magnet
or beam pipe, but let the neutrinos through to a detector far away. By defining the material “Iron” as
below, and then using it as the ironMaterial of all magnets and the material of all beam pipes, only the
neutrinos can escape. This way you can have a very large world, including a distant neutrino detector,
and not waste time simulating uninteresting interactions in magnets or beam pipes, or tracking
uninteresting particles over long distances.

material Iron Fe,1.0 keep=nu_mu,anti_nu_mu,nu_e,anti_nu_e
