## 3.7 Electromagnetic Fields

In the real world, electromagnetic fields are generated by real structures. This is also true in
G4beamline, where various elements include their electromagnetic fields. So a genericbend object
includes not only the geometric shape of its iron and coils, it also includes its magnetic field. Placing a
genericbend element into the world places both its iron and its field; any rotations or offsets used in the
place command apply to both the iron and the field.

As G4beamline is intended to model beamlines, in many cases the field of an element is only valid
inside its aperture (plus perhaps a short distance away for a fringe field). This is so for genericbend and
genericquad, but solenoid and fieldmap have fields throughout space (which are truncated according to
the tolerance specified or the limits of the map).

In Geant4 programs, computing the field is usually the dominant CPU time used during tracking. In
order to minimize this CPU usage, G4beamline optimizes the computation of the field by using a global
bounding box around the field of each element. The World volume is divided into rectangular voxels,
and during initialization each voxel is given a list of all fields whose bounding boxes intersect the voxel.
The voxel size is given by the parameter fieldVoxels, which defaults to “200,200,200” (200 mm on each
side). To compute the field at a given point, the program quickly computes the voxel containing the
point, and then sums the fields from the voxel’s list.

Note: this is quite different from Geant4, where geometry and fields are strictly separate, and voxels are
not used in the field computation.
### 3.8 Visualization

The ability to easily visualize the system being simulated is an important part of G4beamline. Without
visually examining the system in detail, it is easy to make simple mistakes that completely invalidate the
results of the simulation. Users are strongly urged to use visualization frequently.

In order to be visible, a given beamline element must be given a color. Every element accepts an
argument “color=1,1,1”, where the 3 floating-point values are for Red,Green,Blue respectively, and
must be between 0.0 and 1.0 (inclusive). “color=invisible” or “color=’’” is invisible, “color=1,1,1” is
white, “color=0,0,0” is black, “color=0,1,1” is yellow, “color=0.6,0.6,0.6” is gray, etc. Most elements
have a default color of 1,1,1 (white). An optional fourth value, alpha, can be given; it must be between
0.0 and 1.0 (inclusive), and represents the transparency of the element (0=transparent, 1=opaque).
Transparency can be very useful, as it permits you to see tracks inside objects; a wireframe view will
also permit that, but has many extraneous lines that often confuse the eye.

By default, particle tracks are visible: red for negatives, blue for positives, and green for neutrals. See
the particlecolor command to change this. If you run pions or muons you will see all the neutrinos from
their decays; see the trackcuts command to avoid tracking them. You may also be surprised by deltarays, which are really low-energy electrons (e−); trackcuts can eliminate them, too. For example, when
studying π+→μ+→e+ decays, the following commands are useful to color them differently and to
eliminate the neutrinos and other extraneous particles (e.g. delta rays):

particlecolor pi+=1,0,0 mu+=0,1,0 e+=0,0,1

trackcuts keep=pi+,mu+,e+
