## 3.8 Visualization

### 3.7 Electromagnetic Fields

In the real world, electromagnetic fields are generated by real structures. This is also true in
G4beamline, where various elements include their electromagnetic fields. So a genericbend object
includes not only the geometric shape of its iron and coils, it also includes its magnetic field. Placing a
genericbend element into the world places both its iron and its field; any rotations or offsets used in the
place command apply to both the iron and the field.

As G4beamline is intended to model beamlines, in many cases the field of an element is only valid
inside its aperture (plus perhaps a short distance away for a fringe field). This is so for genericbend and
genericquad, but solenoid and fieldmap have fields throughout space (which are truncated according to
the tolerance specified or the limits of the map).

In Geant4 programs, computing the field is usually the dominant CPU time used during tracking. In
order to minimize this CPU usage, G4beamline optimizes the computation of the field by using a global
bounding box around the field of each element. The World volume is divided into rectangular voxels,
and during initialization each voxel is given a list of all fields whose bounding boxes intersect the voxel.
The voxel size is given by the parameter fieldVoxels, which defaults to “200,200,200” (200 mm on each
side). To compute the field at a given point, the program quickly computes the voxel containing the
point, and then sums the fields from the voxel’s list.

Note: this is quite different from Geant4, where geometry and fields are strictly separate, and voxels are
not used in the field computation.

The ability to easily visualize the system being simulated is an important part of G4beamline. Without
visually examining the system in detail, it is easy to make simple mistakes that completely invalidate the
results of the simulation. Users are strongly urged to use visualization frequently.

In order to be visible, a given beamline element must be given a color. Every element accepts an
argument “color=1,1,1”, where the 3 floating-point values are for Red,Green,Blue respectively, and
must be between 0.0 and 1.0 (inclusive). “color=invisible” or “color=’’” is invisible, “color=1,1,1” is
white, “color=0,0,0” is black, “color=0,1,1” is yellow, “color=0.6,0.6,0.6” is gray, etc. Most elements
have a default color of 1,1,1 (white). An optional fourth value, alpha, can be given; it must be between
0.0 and 1.0 (inclusive), and represents the transparency of the element (0=transparent, 1=opaque).
Transparency can be very useful, as it permits you to see tracks inside objects; a wireframe view will
also permit that, but has many extraneous lines that often confuse the eye.

By default, particle tracks are visible: red for negatives, blue for positives, and green for neutrals. See
the particlecolor command to change this. If you run pions or muons you will see all the neutrinos from
their decays; see the trackcuts command to avoid tracking them. You may also be surprised by deltarays, which are really low-energy electrons (e−); trackcuts can eliminate them, too. For example, when
studying π+→μ+→e+ decays, the following commands are useful to color them differently and to
eliminate the neutrinos and other extraneous particles (e.g. delta rays):

particlecolor pi+=1,0,0 mu+=0,1,0 e+=0,0,1

trackcuts keep=pi+,mu+,e+

Once your beamline elements have been given colors (in your input file), and so have your particles, to
actually visualize the simulation you need to select a visualization driver. G4beamline supports the
following visualization drivers from Geant4:
Descriptive Name
Name
Type
Description
–
best
Interactive
Alias for the best viewer available,
currently OGLSQt.
OGLSQt
OGLSQt
Interactive
Renders in 3d using either solid shading
with transparency or wireframe mode (+
others), and permits the easy rotation,
scaling, and movement of the image using
the mouse.
OpenGLImmediateX
OGLIX
Interactive
Basic OpenGL 3-D viewer.
OpenGLStoredX
OGLSX
Interactive
Basic OpenGL 3-D viewer.
ASCIITree
ATree
Offline
A simple hierarchical description written to
stdout.
DawnFile
DAWNFILE
Offline
Use the DAWN viewer.
GAGTree
GAGtree
Offline
Another geometry description written to
stdout.
HepRepFile
HepRepFile
Offline
Use the WIRED viewer (Java).
HepRepFile
HepRepXML Offline
Use the WIRED viewer (Java).
Wired
Wired
Offline
Synonym for HepRepFile.
Wired3
Wired3
Offline
Synonym for HepRepFile.
RayTracer
RayTracer
Offline
Generates JPEG files; use any image
viewer for them.
VRML1FILE
VRML1FILE Offline
Use a VRML viewer.
VRML2FILE
VRML2FILE Offline
Use a VRML viewer.
Interactive viewers display the simulated system and events while G4beamline is running;
Offline viewers write the image to a file for viewing using another program.

The parameter that controls visualization is called viewer, and to use a given visualization driver, simply
add viewer=best to your command line (or name whichever driver you want from the list above). This
puts G4beamline into a mode to perform tracking and visualization rather than just tracking beam. As
multiple events in an image can be useful, viewer=RayTracer,99,5 will use the RayTracer viewer to
generate 5 images containing 99 events each (successive images use the next 99 events of the
simulation).

Visualization requires the file viewer.def, which contains help text and the internal Geant4 commands
required to invoke the selected viewer (it is a simple ASCII file with format documented in its
comments). viewer.def is searched for in the current directory and then in the directory named in
$G4BL_DIR (which points to the G4beamline distribution directory); the file is
$G4BL_DIR/share/g4beamline/viewer.def.

The G4beamline visualizations display all events of a run in a single image; some viewers consider each
image to be an “event”, but for beamlines multiple events in an image are often useful. Once the viewer
has been selected, if you are running g4beamline manually you need to start a run by waiting for the

“idle>” prompt and then typing “/run/beamOn 23” (or however many events you want to display). When
G4beamline presents you with an “idle>” prompt, this is the Geant4 internal command processor.
Viewer.def uses these commands to setup and invoke the selected visualization driver, and to arrange for
tracks to appear in the images. See the Geant4 User’s Guide [1] for details about these commands.
Typing either “exit” or ^C (Ctrl-C) will terminate the program. The “idle>” prompt appears after the
commands in viewer.def have been executed and the visualization viewer is set up. If you are finished,
simply exit the program (^C), or issue “/run/beamOn 23” to run the next 23 events and visualize them
(i.e. generate another image containing those events). The Offline drivers are smart enough to generate a
new image file for every beamOn command (filenames vary for each driver). The g4blgui graphical user
interface program automatically handles all this.

If your input.file has no beam or reference commands, you can visualize the system without any events
simply by setting viewer=best (or other viewer) on the command line.

#### 3.8.1 Additional Visualization Techniques

These techniques use the Geant4 user interface, via the g4ui command of G4beamline. You may want to
look at the Geant4 help for these commands; to do so, go to the examples directory and type (any input
file will do):

g4bl Example1.g4bl viewer=best

Once the viewer opens its window, you will get an Idle> prompt to which you can reply help<CR> and
obtain help on any Geant4 UI command.

Note there are lots of options for the Geant4 viewers, and this is only a short list of those that users have
requested in the past. If there is some aspect of drawing that you want, chances are fairly good that it is
available.
3.8.1.1 Different Drawing Scales
Many beamlines are much longer than they are wide or tall. This makes the transverse dimensions
difficult to see in a viewer, and when magnification is increased to see them, only a very small portion
of the beamline is visible at a time. This can be addressed by using different drawing scales for x, y, and
z. The command to scale x by 2, y by 3, and z by 4 is:

g4ui when=4 “/vis/viewer/scaleTo 2 3 4”
Or type /vis/viewer/scaleTo 2 3 4 to the idle> prompt.
3.8.1.2 Changing the Background Color
To set the background color to white, use this command:

g4ui when=4 “/vis/viewer/set/background 1 1 1”

The 3 values are for red, green, and blue, and should each be a value between 0 and 1; black is “0 0 0”
(the default). A fourth value for opacity can be given. Note that if you have elements that are partially

transparent, any background other than black will affect the colors; in particular, a white background
will make all such elements invisible.
3.8.1.3 Drawing Axes
Drawing the coordinate axes can make it easier to find your way around the image of the system in a
viewer. You can draw a set of axes at any desired location with any desired length. To draw coordinate
axes of 100 mm length at x=1 y=2 z=3 (mm):

g4ui when=4 “/vis/scene/add/axes 1 2 3 100 mm”
3.8.1.4 Cut-Away and Section Planes
The Geant4 drawing interface includes cut-away and section planes. The interface is quirky and you’ll
have to search the Geant4 documentation and just play with it. Not all viewers support this. The
commands are: /vis/viewer/set/sectionPlane and /vis/viewer/addCutawayPlane.

3.8.1.5 Starting up in Wireframe Mode
g4ui when=4 “/vis/viewer/set/style wireframe”
3.8.1.6 Filters
The Geant4 drawing interface includes filters that permit you to only draw certain particle types, or only
particles that were created in a specified physical volume, or …. The interface is quirky, and you’ll have
to search the Geant4 documentation and just play with it.

#### 3.8.2 The OGLSQt Visualization Driver

Because the OGLSQt driver is so much more useful than the other drivers, it is the driver of choice
(linked to the name “best”). This driver will permit you do to almost everything that any other driver can
do.

The OGLSQt driver has many features, described in the “useful Tips” tab of the viewer. It will also do
animation: left click and drag the image, letting go of the button while moving – the image will continue
to rotate until you left click on it.

#### 3.8.3 Troubleshooting

Visualization is usually the only part of G4beamline that causes problems for users getting it to work on
their systems.

On Linux a working X-windows display is required; this means on Linux you usually will run one of the
common desktops (KDE or Gnome), and use a terminal window to execute the G4beamline program.

NOTE: on Mac OS X you no longer need to install XQuartz; the OGLSQt driver uses the native Mac
display.
