## 3.9 Obtaining Results – Virtual Detectors and NTuples

G4beamline visualization requires that the OpenGL extension be configured on the display. This means
that both the X-windows client (the G4beamline program) and the X-windows display server (the
system with display+keyboard+mouse) needs it installed. If you run G4beamline on your desktop Linux
system, this usually happens naturally, but if you connect from your desktop to a Linux server and run
G4beamline there, then you must make sure these extensions are installed on both systems. In particular,
if you use the Exceed program on a Windows desktop to connect to a Linux server, be sure to install
Exceed’s OpenGL extension.

On Windows, all necessary graphics extensions should be installed by default. Remote displays (e.g. via
Citrix) should work as usual.

If you run g4bl with a viewer parameter, and it crashes with the error message “Xlib:  extension GLX
missing on display :0.0.” (or similar), this means you must install the OpenGL extension (glx) on the
system you are using to display. That message may well be followed by a lengthy trace of function calls.
If, instead, it crashes with the error message “error while loading shared libraries: libGL.so.1: cannot
open shared object file: No such file or directory” (or similar), this means you must install some
necessary system library on the system you are using to run g4beamline – see README.txt for details.

G4beamline X-windows visualization will operate over a network, but its performance will be slower
than running locally, even over a 100 Mbit/s LAN. The easiest way to do this is to use ssh with Xwindows forwarding enabled (the –X switch, which is often supplied by default when the ssh client is
run from a terminal window).
### 3.9 Obtaining Results – Virtual Detectors and other NTuples

While Geant4 can be used to make quite detailed models of detectors and their readouts, at present
G4beamline does not attempt to do so. The primary purpose of G4beamline is to track particles and see
where they go (or don’t go). The most common way to obtain output is by using a command that
generates an NTuple.
#### 3.9.1 Track NTuples

A Track NTuple is simply a set of tuples generated for each particle that meets the requirement for
generation; the columns are fields with names, and the rows are the individual track hits. The list of
fields is given below.

The following commands generate an NTuple for tracks:
• A virtualdetector is an idealized perfect detector that “detects” every track that hits it, and
measures all of the track properties with the resolution of a 32-bit float (including position, 3momentum, particle type, event #, etc.). It is “virtual” because any material (including Vacuum)
can be used and by default it uses the material of its parent so it doesn’t affect the tracking of
particles. Multiple tracks from a given event that hit the virtualdetector will be stored as separate
rows in the NTuple (with the same EventID), as will multiple hits from a single track (with the
same EventID and TrackID). The measurements for all such tracks are output to a file as an
NTuple.

• A detector is similar to a virtualdetector, except it must have a realistic material (default is
Scintillator). It output the track information as above, plus the energy deposited and the visible
energy deposited (modified by the Birks effect).
• A zntuple is similar to a virtualdetector, except that no physical volume is used; whenever a
track reaches the specified Z position (centerline coordinates), it is sampled in the same manner
as a virtualdetector. All zntuple-s are named “Z100” with the number being its Z position
rounded to the nearest millimeter. Note that the zntuple can span multiple physical volumes,
while the virtualdetector cannot.
• A sample is like a zntuple, but it is unrelated to the centerline coordinates. It will generate an
NTuple of all tracks that intersect a disk or polygon; it can be placed multiple times anywhere in
the world (or other volume), with any orientation.
• A timentuple samples the tracks at a specified time.
• A newparticlentuple samples tracks when they are created.
• A beamlossntuple samples tracks as they are killed.
• An ntuple is a collection of the data for one or more other NTuple-s, with each row of the
NTuple being a single event or track, and the columns being the union of all included NTuple-s,
in order. Any NTuple generated by any of the above commands, including ntuple itself, can be
included in this NTuple, as long as the other commands precede this one in the input.file. This
command with union=1 and a list of other commands with identical fields will simply combine
all tracks of those other commands into a single NTuple.
• A trace is an NTuple generated for a single track. The rows of the NTuple are the series of steps
taken by tracking, and the columns are the same as for a virtualdetector plus the electromagnetic
fields (B and E). Each track is a single NTuple (a separate file in ASCII formats).

Normally each virtualdetector generates an NTuple for its hits (singles), as do zntuple and sample. The
ntuple command can be used to combine multiple virtualdetector, sample and zntuple data into a single
NTuple, with each row of the NTuple containing all data for a single event (if multiple tracks of the
event hit a given virtualdetector or zntuple, only the first is kept in the NTuple).

By default, all NTuples are written to a single Root [5] output file. A Root-based histogramming
program, HistoRoot, is available from http://historoot.muonsinc.com, which can generate histograms in
a very flexible and intuitive manner from Root files and ASCII files, via a graphical user interface. In
the future, G4beamline may be extended to use other formats for NTuples as well.

The format=ascii argument to these commands writes an ASCII file for each NTuple, containing one
track per line, with comments at the start giving the variable names and their units. The historoot
program can read these ASCII files, including the variable names from the initial comment. Gnuplot
[10] can also be used to generate plots from these ASCII files.

The standard fields of an NTuple generated for tracks contains the following variables (in order):
Name
Description
x, y, z
The position of the track, in the selected coordinates. Millimeters.
Px, Py, Pz
The momentum of the track, in the selected coordinates. MeV/c.
t
The global time of the track. Nanoseconds.
PDGid
The ID of the particle, using the assigned value from the Particle
Data Group.

EventID
The event number.
TrackID
The track identifier.
ParentID
The track identifier for this track’s parent; 0 if this is a beam track.
Weight
The weight of the track (defaults to 1.0).
TrackIDs are supposed to be unique within each event; they normally start at 1 for the beam particle(s).
Secondary particles’ TrackIDs normally start at 1000 and increment sequentially for additional
secondaries.

The trace command adds the following fields to the NTuple, after the standard fields:
Name
Description
Bx, By, Bz
The magnetic field at the track’s position, in the selected
coordinates. Tesla.
Ex, Ey, Ez
The electric field at the track’s position, in the selected coordinates.
Megavolts/meter.

The format=Extended, format=asciiExtended, or format=rootExtended argument to these commands
adds the following fields to the NTuple, after the standard fields and the B and E fields from the trace
format:
Name
Description
ProperTime
The proper time of the track since it was created. Nanoseconds.
PathLength
The total path length of the track since it was created. Millimeters.
PolX, PolY, PolZ
The polarization of the track in the selected coordinates.
InitialKE
The Kinetic Energy of the track when it was created. MeV.

3.9.2 printf
The printf command generates a printout in a user-specified format for every track that reaches its
specified Z position; the standard fields above can be used in expressions to be printed via conversion
specifications in the printf format string. Output can be to stdout or to a file, and multiple printf-s to the
same file will be output to the file in the order tracks reach their Z positions, and in the order the printf-s
appear in the input file for the same Z position. This permits ASCII output of track information in any
desired ASCII format, perhaps to feed directly into some other program.
3.9.3 profile
The profile command prints a computation of the means, sigmas, and emittances for all tracks at a given
Z position.
3.9.4 totalenergy
The totalenergy command totals up the energy deposited by all tracks of a run in selected physical
volumes, and prints the results at the end of the run. Output defaults to stdout, but can be put into a file.
With appropriate post-processing this can be used to estimate heat loads in specified volumes.
