## 8.10 How to Debug a Simulation

An exception is a Neutrino Factory decay ring, in which muons are stored, but the desired beam is
neutrinos. The difficulty is that the far detector may be very far away, which makes the World be quite
large, and tracking non-neutrino particles is wasteful. The best solution is to surround the storage ring
with beam pipes and magnets having a special material that kills all particles except neutrinos. As the
neutrinos spread out, and ones that miss the far detector are uninteresting, one can separate the source
and far detector by a cylinder with material=Rock, and surround it with a thin tube with kill=1.

An important debugging aid is the geometry test performed by G4beamline. The results appear in the
output just before tracking. In the real world, two objects cannot occupy the same space; the simulated
world does not have this restriction, and input-file errors can generate unphysical and invalid overlaps.
The Geant4 optimization of tracking requires a strict hierarchical arrangement of volumes. Usually any
geometry errors listed should be corrected in your input file before believing the simulation results; in
some cases this is difficult or impossible, and some exceptions are listed in section 9.2 on Advanced
Topics.

The most common debugging technique is to add steppingVerbose=1 to the command line (or the
Parameters field of the GUI). This causes G4beamline to print (to stdout) the track variables at every
step. That usually lets you figure out what is going wrong. Note that by setting steppingFormat you can
control what track variables are printed (see the help for details) – this can be very useful when
debugging E and B fields, or spinTracking. In most cases it is best to widen your display’s window
before running, so lines are not wrapped – 140 columns is usually sufficient.

Sometimes the problems are subtle, and only rare events look crazy. If you can select those “crazy”
events with sliders in historoot, then you can set its EventID field to cause it to write the histo_event.txt
file. You can then check the HistoRootEvents checkbox in the GUI, or put an eventcuts command into
your input.file. Running with a viewer will then permit you to visualize just the “crazy” events – seeing
them will often let you figure out what’s wrong.

Note that G4beamline simulations are quite realistic. This means that pions and muons will decay,
particles will interact in material objects, and tracks will propagate wherever they can go (even if you
don’t expect it). Decay neutrinos can look “crazy” if you’re not expecting them (so cut on PDGid in the
plots, or eliminate them at the source with a trackcuts in your input.file). You may be surprised at the
delta-rays (low energy electrons) produced in vacuum windows and other materials (eliminate them with
a trackcuts command with kineticEnergyCut=1 or higher, or perhaps kill=e-). Tracks can occasionally
go in the most amazing places, and you need to install shielding just as in a real accelerator (use the
radiusCut as described above, or add a box or tubs with kill=1 and place it appropriately; when complete
you can use color=invisible to avoid cluttering your visualizations). It is often appropriate to surround
the beam line with beam pipes having kill=1 – this avoids spending CPU time on unwanted tracks, and
prevents them from taking “shortcuts” and re-appearing as crazy events in plots; add kill=1 to quads and
bends, etc.

In my experience, the most common errors in G4beamline simulations and interpreting results are:
1. Failure to cut on PDGid in plots and histograms, and thus confusing other particles for the
desired ones.
