## 8.11 Geant4 Commands

2. Failure to put shielding in appropriate places and thus having particles go in unexpected places,
causing “crazy” events in plots and other confusion.
3. Mistakes in the input file that cause invalid overlaps of objects.
4. Mistakes in the input file that unintentionally omit objects or put them in the wrong place.
5. Inappropriate values of tracking parameters (see section 4) that cause Geant4 to optimize
tracking in an unsuitable or insufficiently accurate manner.

Geant4 has an internal command processor with a large number of commands. For the most part,
G4beamline users don’t need to use these commands, as G4beamline controls all aspects of the
simulation. Nevertheless, there are situations for which a user might want to issue a Geant4 command.
There are two rather different ways to do this:
1. Simply put the Geant4 command into the input.file, putting its initial “/” in column 1.
Such commands are issued when they are read – that happens before the system is constructed,
and for many commands that is too early.
2. Use the g4ui command.
The when argument controls when the command is issued, and all values are after the system is
constructed.

The Geant4 command interpreter is quirky, but there is a way to obtain a list of all its commands:
/control/manual. This command can use either method above.

The most common reason to issue a Geant4 command is to set some verbose level, for debugging or
investigating some aspect of Geant4 (most especially its physics processes). G4beamline sets all verbose
levels to 0 initially. Here is the list of commands that G4beamline runs to do that:
/control/verbose 0
/run/verbose 0
/event/verbose 0
/tracking/verbose 0
/hits/verbose 0
/material/verbose 0
/process/setVerbose 0 all
/process/verbose 0
/process/eLoss/verbose 0

Another reason to use a Geant4 command is to control a viewer. Use “g4ui when=4” for that. The
selected viewer’s initialization commands (from viewer.def) will be executed before such commands.
### 8.12 Obtaining Plots and Histograms

There are a number of different ways to generate plots and histograms from G4beamline output files. I
generally find HistoRoot to be most convenient, but each user should use the method they are most
comfortable with. Both HistoRoot and PAW can fit functions to histograms or plots; excel and some
other spreadsheets can do so, perhaps with more overhead.
