## 8.13 Obtaining Pictures of the System and Events

General Remarks
In most cases, you must cut on PDGid when generating a plot or histogram (PDGid is the Particle Data
Group’s ID for the particle of a track, so this is selecting the type of particle to plot). G4beamline
simulations are realistic, and particles will decay and interact, generating secondary particles. Without
such a cut, secondary particles can greatly confuse the interpretation of a plot. HistoRoot has a specific
feature to display the particle types: put “PDGid” into the “Particle Type” field, and whenever the
NTuple is scanned to generate the plot, a list of the PDGid-s contained within the slider cuts will be
printed, with names for common particles.

To display a bundle of tracks, put “trace nTrace=100 format=ascii oneNTuple=1” into your input.file,
and then use gnuplot to plot the AllTracks.txt file that G4beamline wrote. gnuplot omits the back-trace
line between tracks because the trace command puts a blank line between tracks, specifically for this.
gnuplot is available for Linux as part of the Linux distribution, for Mac OS via Fink, HomeBrew, or
MacPorts, and for Windows via http://www.gnuplot.info/ .

HistoRoot
HistoRoot requires Root to be installed, and for best results, install the version of Root available from
http://historoot.muonsinc.com. By default, all NTuples generated by G4beamline are placed into a single
Root file. Note, however, that HistoRoot can also read the ASCII NTuple files written by G4beamline
(and other programs – see the HistoRoot Help for the file formats accepted). Generating plots and
histograms is simple, and the help for HistoRoot should permit you to get started right away. You can
quickly and easily plot arbitrary expressions of the NTuple’s fields, with cuts applied based on
expressions; there are four sliders which implement cuts that affect the plot in real time.  For more
complicated analyses (e.g. computing masses of multi-particle states), Root can be used as an analysis
platform; this is advanced usage and is beyond the scope of this tip.

Gnuplot
Gnuplot can directly read the ASCII NTuples written by G4beamline (add format=ascii to the
G4beamline command). Note that Gnuplot does not generate histograms; you’ll have to use another
program to do that. Gnuplot is especially good at displaying multiple trajectories from “trace
format=ascii oneNtuple=1”. gnuplot is available for Linux as part of the Linux distribution, for Mac OS
via Fink, HomeBrew, or MacPorts, and for Windows via http://www.gnuplot.info/ .

Excel and other Spreadsheet Programs
Excel and most other spreadsheet programs can read the ASCII NTuples written by G4beamline (add
format=ascii to the G4beamline command). Each line is a row of the NTuple with tabs separating the
columns; the first 2-3 lines give comments, column names, and column units (optional).

PAW
PAW can read the ASCII NTuples written by G4beamline (add format=ascii to the G4beamline
command), possibly after a format conversion.

G4beamline is a complicated and flexible program, and like all such programs it is subject to “garbage
in, garbage out”. So it is important to check and verify that your input.file actually represents the
