## 8.14 Warning and Error messages – Which Ones can be ignored

simulation you want, and not some other (perhaps unphysical) system. An important tool for this is the
visualization implemented by G4beamline – many errors can be found simply by looking at the system
to be simulated.

To see the interactive visualizations, you need to have an active windowing environment. On Windows
and Mac this is automatic; on Linux it is automatic as long as you run X windows (i.e. login via the
GUI). Then all you need do is append “viewer=best” to your g4bl command, and the OGLSQt viewer
will be displayed. Other viewers can be used; get their names by using viewer=best and looking near the
end of the output for a list of supported viewers. As the display is refreshed only at end-of-run, you may
need to type the Geant4 command “/run/beamOn 10” to run 10 events and display them and the system
(but if your input.file has no beam command, the system is displayed immediately).

In the GUI environment, simply select the viewer. Each run will be displayed in the viewer as a single
image, so setting events/run determines how many events are shown. In the best viewer, push StartRun
to simulate the next run and display its image. Other viewers can be selected as described in the View
menu.

To save the image into a file, some viewers have a File menu item that can save in various formats (e.g.
OpenInventor can save as PostScript). In any viewer, you can take a screenshot of the viewer window
and save it to a file:
• Windows: Ctrl-PrtScrn followed by running a program to save the Clipboard in a graphics
format (e.g. Paint)
• Linux: a program like ksnapshot
• Mac OS X: the Grab utility (menu: Capture), the Preview utility (menu: File/Grab), or type
shift-command-4 and select the desired region of the screen
Note that screenshots all save a bitmap, but for viewers that implement it the File/Save menu item can
generate a vector file that is smaller and scales better.

G4beamline errors are all unified within the Geant4 G4Exception framework. This gives them a
common look, and ensures that in a MPI environment they are all tabulated in rank 0 and summarized at
the end of the job.

Errors in the input file generate an error message immediately while reading and listing the input file.
They must be fixed before the simulation will run. These are such things as syntax errors, invalid
parameter names, invalid arguments to commands, etc.

Errors and warnings generated during execution are handled by the G4Exception function; they are
printed as a 6-line message starting and ending with a row of asterisks – that makes them stand out
visually in a long printout. Those that are issued by a routine beginning with “G4” came from Geant4
code, while those issued by a routine beginning with “BL” came from G4beamline code; those that are
issued by a command names are also from G4beamline code. It is important to distinguish these two
cases, as how you obtain help on them may differ.
