## 8.15 Secondary Tracks and Particles

The severity of the message is a strong indicator of whether it can be ignored, or indicates a serious
problem. Note that a Warning issued by many events probably means the simulation cannot be trusted.
Warnings on a tiny fraction of the events can probably be safely ignored (unless they are related to
specific rare events of interest). Even Errors that abort the track or event might well be ignorable if they
occur only rarely. Note that G4beamline suppresses many similar exception printouts, so look at the
Exception Summary at the end of the output to see how many actually occurred.

Errors issued by G4beamline code can be discussed in our user’s forum (see section 8.1).

Errors issued by Geant4 code can be discussed in the Geant4 forums (linked to the Geant4 home page,
http://geant4.cern.ch). You can also discuss them as in the previous paragraph (choose one method, not
both).

See also section 3.8.3 on troubleshooting visualization problems. A reasonably complete list of
G4beamline error messages is given in Appendix 5. Here are some notes on specific exceptions:

Stuck Track
If you track very low-energy tracks (< 100 eV), and have materials in your simulated world, then you
will probably see a number of “Stuck Track” exceptions that kill the track. This occurs because very low
energy tracks can get stuck on the surface, taking many extremely small steps (< 1 micron). Such tracks
would really get absorbed into the material, so killing the track is a reasonable thing to do. Such error
messages can usually be ignored, unless they dominate your simulation.

Large Primary TrackID
This exception has a specific cause and cure. Remember that tracking in Geant4 (and thus G4beamline)
will often generate secondary tracks, and these must each be assigned a TrackID. To minimize the
collision of multiple tracks within an event having identical TrackID-s, secondary tracks by default have
TrackIDs starting with 1001 and incrementing thereafter. If the input beam file has a TrackID ≥ 1001,
then confusion can result, so this exception is issued. You could edit your beam file to not have such
large TrackID-s, or you can add the following to the beam command that reads the file:
secondaryTrackID=2001. This avoids the overlap, and thus the exception; larger values can be used if
necessary.

Unlike most accelerator physics programs, G4beamline includes particle decays and interactions of
particles with matter. This means that during a simulation new particle tracks can, and usually will, be
created. For instance, whenever the beam goes through a vacuum window, delta-rays (low-energy e–)
will be produced; a beam of unstable particles will generate decay products, etc. In some simulations
such secondaries are essential (e.g. for a muon beam produced by pion decay), but in others these
secondary particles are uninteresting and are merely a nuisance (as, perhaps, are the neutrinos associated
with that muon beam). G4beamline has several mechanisms to let you deal with secondaries:
• physics – doStochastics=0 will turn off all stochastic processes, which has major implications,
but this implicitly inhibits the creation of secondaries
• physics – disable=process will turn off specific physics processes
