## 8.16 Finding Example Input Files using the XXX command

• trackcuts – killSecondaries=1 will kill all secondaries; keep=list will keep only those particles,
killing all others; kill=list will kill those specific particles
• particlecolor – assigns colors to different particles for the viewers

Note that when generating histograms and plots, you usually need to cut on PDGid (the Particle Data
Group’s assigned ID for the particle of the track). It is all too easy to look at a histogram, see an outlier,
and wonder what is happening – in many cases the outlier is merely a secondary track from a decay or
interaction, and is unrelated to the phenomenon of interest.

HistoRoot has a specific feature to display the particle types: Put “PDGid” into the “Particle Type” field,
and whenever the NTuple is scanned to generate the plot, a list of the PDGid-s contained within the
slider cuts will be printed, with names for common particles.

Here is a list of common (stable) particle PDGid-s (negative for anti-particle):

PDGid
Particle

PDGid
Particle

PDGid
Particle
11
e-

12
ne

13
µ-
14
nµ

16
nt

22
g
111
p0

211
p+

311
K0
321
K+

2112
n

2212
p

A much more complete list of particle IDs is in Appendix 4, and in the help text of the GUI.

First look in the examples directory of the distribution; see section 7. There is at least one test for every
G4beamline command – look in the test directory under the G4beamline installation directory. You can
also send an inquiry our user’s forum (see section 8.1).
### 8.17 Parameterizing the Input File

This is a general technique applicable to many different situations.

Parameters in G4beamline are names that represent strings. Whenever $name appears in an argument to
a command, the current value of the parameter name will be substituted. Note this is not a general macro
substitution, and it only occurs in the values of command arguments. In addition, for all real- and intvalued arguments and in the param command, argument values that are numerical expressions are
evaluated after $name substitution; the standard C math functions can be used. See section 5.1 on
expressions and section 5.3 on parameters.

Parameters can be defined by the param command, on the command line, and in the Parameters: field
of the GUI. These last two methods permit different runs using the same input.file to be different. In all
cases a parameter is set with the syntax name=value, without spaces; the value can be enclosed in single-
or double-quotes to include whitespace. These examples will use the command-line interface, but the
Parameters field of the GUI can be used in the same way.
