## 8.18 Setting Fields of Magnets

The basic idea is to use a parameter rather than hard-coding a specific value into the input.file. Usually
one wants to provide a default value for the parameter, so it is never undefined. As an example, imagine
you want to compare the effects of several different target materials, all with the same size. The
input.file could look like this:
param –unset MATERIAL=Cu
...
box Target material=$MATERIAL ...
...
Note the initial “param –unset” command – this provides a default value for the parameter. Commands
to run this simulation for several materials would be:
g4bl input.file MATERIAL=Cu
g4bl input.file MATERIAL=W
g4bl input.file MATERIAL=Be

Note that in the previous example the Root output file will be overwritten each time, so one must be
careful to obtain all desired output from one run before starting the next. A better input.file will use
different output files for each run:
param –unset MATERIAL=Cu
param histoFile=$MATERIAL
output $histoFile
...
box Target material=$MATERIAL ...
...
The second param command sets the name of the Root output file to include the material (this command
cannot be combined with the first param command and must not have -unset). The output command
then re-directs stdout and stderr to files “Cu.out”, “W.out”, “Be.out”, etc. It’s best to put only param
commands before the output command, so all output gets re-directed into the output file.

This can obviously be extended to as many different parameters as desired. It is useful to put them all
into the histoFile and output values, perhaps separated by commas.

By putting the parameter values into the output filenames, multiple runs can be executed in parallel, in
the same directory. This is especially useful on a system with multiple cores, or on a cluster or grid.

If you have a specified field for a solenoid, you need to convert that into a current (density), as that is the
argument of the solenoid command that determines the field. You can compute the ampere-turns
required, but that is both time consuming and error prone. A better way is to use the probefield
command with its input set to a file containing the global coordinates of the solenoid’s center. Just guess
a value for the current and run the simulation; from the printed value you can take the appropriate ratio
and quickly determine the current required to give the desired field. You can also use the printfield or
fieldntuple commands for this.

If, instead, you have a specified current for a given magnet, then you will need the magnet’s
specifications to determine the field corresponding to that current. Except for a solenoid without iron,
there is no simple way to relate field and current. If you have a drawing of the magnet, you could in
