## 8.19 Tuning Bending Magnets

principle construct a model of the magnet using an EM modeling tool (Tosca, Opera3D, Ansys, …); that
is usually a major effort – the drawing probably gives a value for the integral of B dl, which should be
enough for you to compute the field.

G4beamline is a realistic simulation program, and like a real beamline, the bending magnets in a
simulated beamline must be tuned for position, orientation, and field (current). To model a real beamline
that has the corners of the beam centerline marked on the floor, a corner or cornerarc command will be
used to model each corner. This implies that the corners are fixed and the bending magnet must be
positioned and tuned appropriately. The standard criterion is that a reference particle coming into the
magnet along the centerline of the beam should exit the magnet along the centerline, both measured
outside the fringe fields of the magnet. If there are solenoids or other magnets near the bending magnet
such that their fringe fields overlap, then the tuning of the bending magnet may depend on their settings.
Note that if quadrupoles are used to steer the beam, these remarks apply to them, too.

See also section 3.11 (Tuning the Beamline).

To begin, make sure you have a reference command that puts a reference particle down the centerline
into the bending magnet. This implies that if you have multiple bends in your beamline, you should start
tuning with the first bend, and proceed downstream.

The usual orientation for a rectangular bending magnet is with its front and rear faces angled at half the
total bending angle to the centerlines. It must be placed a short distance behind the corner in order that
its fringe fields are accounted for, and must be placed a bit to the outside of the bend so the two
centerlines are equidistant from the left and right sides of the aperture.

The usual orientation for a sector bending magnet is with its front and rear faces perpendicular to their
centerlines.

Other orientations are possible, and can be used to affect the vertical focusing of the bending magnet.
The beamline designer will specify the appropriate angle of the magnet relative to the centerlines.

G4beamline can automatically tune the field of a bending magnet, but cannot tune its position. So the
best approach is to put the field tuning into the input file and then tune the position manually – this
reduces a 3-parameter manual problem to two parameters, which goes much faster. Once the position is
correct for one reference momentum, other reference momenta can be handled by simply re-tuning the
field (or manually adjusting it). Here is an example for a 60-degree left bend:
Param –unset Zoffset=0 Xoffset=0
tune B1Field z0=1000 z1=3000 initial=-2.000 step=0.05 \

expr=Px1/Pz1 tolerance=0.000001
place B1 z=2000+$Zoffset x=$Xoffset rotation=Y30 By=B1Field
corner z=2000 angle=60
The basic idea is that the tune command will vary the value of B1Field and re-track the tune particle
from z0=1000 until it is parallel to the centerline at z1=3000, within 1 microradian (tolerance). The user
will manually vary Zoffset and Xoffset until the magnet is properly placed so that reference particle is
