## 8.20 Setting the Phase of RF Cavities (pillbox)

on the centerline at z1=3000 and is equidistant from the horizontal edges of its aperture (these are not
independent, due to the rotation of the magnet and the presence of its fringe field; both will be
reasonably close to 0, within ~200 mm or so). Note the initial value in the tune command must be close
enough so the initial tune particle actually reaches z1=3000 (i.e. does not hit any aperture beforehand).

The idea is to put “Zoffset=0 Xoffset=0 steppingVerbose=1” onto the command line (or Parameters in
the GUI), and re-run the simulation while varying their values until the reference particle is on the
centerline at z1=3000. To speed this up, it is useful to temporarily set the beam command(s) to run one
event (nEvents=1). To avoid laborious scanning of a long output file with many steps, it is useful to use
the command-line program and pipe it into grep with an appropriate pattern to select a step near or at
z=3000 (because step-lengths can vary, it may help to temporarily place an object at z=3000 and grep
for it). NOTE: be sure to look at the reference particle, and not any tune or beam particle.

First keep Xoffset=0 and vary Zoffset. You will quickly learn how changes in value relate to distance
from the centerline. This usually executes in about 3-5 seconds, and you ought to be able to find the
required value of Zoffset in a few minutes. Using the command-line history in your shell greatly speeds
this up. To tune Xoffset you must add this command to make the reference particle visible and white:
“trackcolor reference=1,1,1” (I put it just after the beam command; you can leave it in). Once you have
the value for Zoffset, then add viewer=best to the end of the command and re-run it, typing
“/run/beamOn 1” to the Geant4 Idle> prompt (as indicated by the comments preceding it). In
OpenInventor, select wireframe mode (right click, DrawStyles/StillDrawStyle/wireframe). Now rotate
the image using the mouse until you can see the white reference track inside the bending magnet (ignore
the beam track(s) that are other colors); zoom in if necessary, and use a ruler or judge by eye whether or
not it is centered left-right. If it is not centered, guess how much change in Xoffset is needed. Then go
back to tuning Zoffset with this new value (no viewer).

Once you have values for Zoffset and Xoffset, edit the input.file and put them in.

If you want to handle beams with different momenta, you can parameterize the momentum and B1Field
like this (assuming you initially tuned at 200 MeV/c and B1Field for 200 MeV/c was 2.10525 Tesla):
param –unset MOMENTUM=200
beam Gaussian meanMomentum=$MOMENTUM ...
reference referenceMomentum=$MOMENTUM ...
tune B1Field ... initial=2.10525*$MOMENTUM/200 ...
...

The phase of an RF cavity (pillbox) is determined by its timeOffset and timeIncrement arguments. If
timeOffset is not specified it is automatically set to phaseAcc by the Tune particle.

The basic method used to set the phase: when the Tune particle enters the volume of the pillbox its track
parameters are saved and an initial value of timeOffset is estimated (based on its current velocity and the
distance to the center of the cavity). Then it is tracked to the center of the cavity and its phase is checked
(the volume is split in two to ensure the track takes a step ending in the center of the cavity). If the phase
is correct within tolerance, nothing further is done and the Tune particle continues being tracked. If the
