## 8.21 Tuning the maxGradient of RF Cavities (pillbox)

phase is incorrect, the timeOffset value is adjusted via a simple linear solver, the current Tune particle is
killed, and a new Tune particle is generated from the saved values. This usually converges in one
iteration.

If timeIncrement is nonzero, it is added to timeOffset after all tuning is complete. The Tune particle is
not re-tracked, so large values will completely confuse the reference particle. timeIncrement is intended
for exploring small phase errors of the RF.

See also section 3.11 (Tuning the Beamline).

When RF cavities are used, it is generally necessary to carefully tune their maxGradient so the output
beam has the desired energy or momentum. The operators of the machine arrange for this (either
manually or via an automated feedback system). In G4beamline this requires the tune command and is
done while tracking the Tune particle, usually in parallel with setting their phases (see previous section).

The tune command defines a “tune variable” and will arrange to save the Tune particle at one Z-position
(z0), track the Tune particle to a second Z-position (z1), and then evaluate an expression using track
fields. It then varies its tune variable in an attempt to make the expression evaluate to 0.0. This of course
requires that some relevant beamline elements between z0 and z1 use the tune variable to change their
behavior appropriately. In this case we’ll vary the maxGradient of all RF cavities between z0 and z1,
and use an expression at z1 that makes the Tune particle have the desired momentum, which we’ll take
as 1 GeV/c to within 1 MeV/c:
tune Grad z0=990 z1=41010 initial=10.0 step=0.5 \

expr=Pz1-1000 tolerance=0.001
pillbox Cavity maxGradient=Grad frequency=0.201 \
innerLength=400 ...
place Cavity z=1000 copies=100
Note that z0 must come before the first Cavity is placed, and z1 must be after the last Cavity is placed, at
the location where the 1 GeV/c beam is desired.

See also section 3.11 (Tuning the Beamline).
### 8.22 Multiple Jobs in Parallel

In many cases you will want to run multiple simulations, typically scanning one or more parameters. In
this case it is often not necessary to run multiple jobs in parallel (with or without MPI), as you can
simply run the different simulations on the available CPUs. In this case nothing special is needed, as
long as you keep the different output files from clashing (parameterizing the input file can help, section
8.17).

There certainly are situations in which multiple jobs working on a single simulation are appropriate.

There are two ways to run multiple G4beamline jobs in parallel, all working on a single simulation:
1. Manually or via scripts
