## 8.22 Multiple Jobs in Parallel

phase is incorrect, the timeOffset value is adjusted via a simple linear solver, the current Tune particle is
killed, and a new Tune particle is generated from the saved values. This usually converges in one
iteration.

If timeIncrement is nonzero, it is added to timeOffset after all tuning is complete. The Tune particle is
not re-tracked, so large values will completely confuse the reference particle. timeIncrement is intended
for exploring small phase errors of the RF.

See also section 3.11 (Tuning the Beamline).
### 8.21 Tuning the maxGradient of RF Cavities (pillbox)

When RF cavities are used, it is generally necessary to carefully tune their maxGradient so the output
beam has the desired energy or momentum. The operators of the machine arrange for this (either
manually or via an automated feedback system). In G4beamline this requires the tune command and is
done while tracking the Tune particle, usually in parallel with setting their phases (see previous section).

The tune command defines a “tune variable” and will arrange to save the Tune particle at one Z-position
(z0), track the Tune particle to a second Z-position (z1), and then evaluate an expression using track
fields. It then varies its tune variable in an attempt to make the expression evaluate to 0.0. This of course
requires that some relevant beamline elements between z0 and z1 use the tune variable to change their
behavior appropriately. In this case we’ll vary the maxGradient of all RF cavities between z0 and z1,
and use an expression at z1 that makes the Tune particle have the desired momentum, which we’ll take
as 1 GeV/c to within 1 MeV/c:
tune Grad z0=990 z1=41010 initial=10.0 step=0.5 \

expr=Pz1-1000 tolerance=0.001
pillbox Cavity maxGradient=Grad frequency=0.201 \
innerLength=400 ...
place Cavity z=1000 copies=100
Note that z0 must come before the first Cavity is placed, and z1 must be after the last Cavity is placed, at
the location where the 1 GeV/c beam is desired.

See also section 3.11 (Tuning the Beamline).

In many cases you will want to run multiple simulations, typically scanning one or more parameters. In
this case it is often not necessary to run multiple jobs in parallel (with or without MPI), as you can
simply run the different simulations on the available CPUs. In this case nothing special is needed, as
long as you keep the different output files from clashing (parameterizing the input file can help, section
8.17).

There certainly are situations in which multiple jobs working on a single simulation are appropriate.

There are two ways to run multiple G4beamline jobs in parallel, all working on a single simulation:
1. Manually or via scripts

2. Via the Message Passing Interface (MPI)
#### 8.22.1 Manually or via Scripts

G4beamline is a realistic simulation program, and runs considerably slower than many accelerator
simulation programs. While simple simulations can run as fast as ~1000 events per second, a moderately
complicated system might run ~100 events per second, and complex simulations can run fewer than 1
event per second. With the advent of Linux clusters and multi-core CPUs, it is now quite common to be
able to run multiple jobs in parallel. The key to doing that in G4beamline is that it always seeds the
pseudo-random number generator with the event number, just before starting to process the event. The
PRNG used comes from CLHEP [2], and has excellent properties for event numbers from 0 to
900,000,000.

These basic capabilities are needed to run multiple jobs in parallel:
1. The ability to submit multiple jobs.
This is system dependent. On a multi-core or multi-CPU system, you can simply use multiple
terminal windows or multiple GUI windows to run multiple jobs simultaneously. Be sure to keep
the jobs separate, including output files. On Linux, Mac OS, and Windows/Cygwin you can use
a single terminal window to run several jobs simultaneously “in the background”:
g4bl input.file first=1000000 last=1199999 >1000000.out &
g4bl input.file first=1200000 last=1299999 >1200000.out &
g4bl input.file first=1300000 last=1399999 >1300000.out &
On a Linux cluster or other multi-system, you will need to learn how to submit multiple “batch”
jobs.
2. The ability to assign a unique range of event numbers to each job.
Do this with parameters in your input.file. I use first and last, and the commands are:
param –unset first=1 last=1000
beam …. firstEvent=$first lastEvent=$last
3. The ability to assign a unique Root output file to each job.
Use first in the name of histoFile:
param histoFile=$first
4. The ability to combine all of the Root output files into histograms and plots.
Use HistoRoot to read all the root files, and simply select the same NTuple from each file.
HistoRoot will combine all selected NTuples into each plot.

Note that this works well up to perhaps 32 parallel jobs; above that it becomes quite cumbersome.
#### 8.22.2 Via the Message Passing Interface (MPI)

On systems that implement MPI, it can be used to speed up a simulation by a factor that is almost the
number of CPUs available. The advantage is that all outputs from the different instances are combined
into a single output (typically one Root file, one stderr, and one stdout). See section 9.4. The program
scales well up to thousands of CPUs (for complex sytems); this depends in detail on the system being
simulated and on the computer hardware used; more complex systems will scale efficiently to more
CPUs.

Note the program must be built from source and configured specifically for the MPI system on which it
will run.

The basic command is:

g4blmpi 16 input.file [… parameters]

This will run 16 ranks of G4beamline cooperating on a single simulation. As one rank performs only
management tasks, it is often appropriate to start one more instance than the number of available CPUs.
Section 9.4 has many more implementation details and suggestions.
### 8.23 Performing a Scan of Values of Some Parameter

It often happens that one wants to scan over the values of some parameter, looking for maximum
transmission, the desired emittance at a given location, or some other aspect of the beamline. The idea is
to parameterize the input.file so the parameter can be specified on the command line, and then either
manually scan or write a shell script to do the scan. For example:
Param –unset VALUE=1
... rest of input, using $VALUE

One can simply do this:
g4bl input.file VALUE=1.01 >1.01.out
g4bl input.file VALUE=1.02 >1.02.out
g4bl input.file VALUE=1.03 >1.03.out
g4bl input.file VALUE=1.04 >1.04.out
...
and keep track of the desired property. If the desired property is printed to stdout (e.g. it appears
normally, or via a printf command), one can use grep to greatly simplify the search for its value. This
method gives a lot of output, and it can be time consuming to scan it all for the desired property of
interest. So it is often better to write a short shell script to run G4beamline (with VALUE passed) and
then grep for the desired property, or otherwise compute it, and just output that one item. Often the
command history of your shell is sufficient.

One can also write a simple shell script to run the jobs in the background (see previous tip). On a 4-core
system, it is usually best to run four jobs in the background, do a wait, run four jobs in the background,
etc. In the bash shell, wait (no arguments) waits until all background jobs have completed, so this does a
reasonably good job of keeping four jobs running, but does not overload the system with too many
simultaneous jobs.
### 8.24 Visually Scanning Events via the Command Line

The simplest way to scan events visually is to use the g4blgui program, but it can be done manually via
the command line. The OpenInventor driver (OIX) has the ability to exit the viewer and return to the
Geant4 command input (File/Escape). This can be used to quickly scan events visually. To do this, first
create a text file called beamon.txt containing a large number of identical lines:
/run/beamOn 1
/run/beamOn 1
/run/beamOn 1

… many more identical lines
Then invoke g4beamline like this:
g4bl  input.file  viewer=best  <beamon.txt

Once the viewer appears, it will display the first event. To see the next event, select the File/Escape
menu item. This will suspend the OpenInventor viewer, and the Geant4 input routine will read the next
line of beamon.txt – that causes it to track one event and refresh the viewer with it. Just keep selecting
File/Escape to sequence through events one at a time. This is essentially what the g4blgui program does
when a viewer is selected.
### 8.25 Optimizing the Value of Some Parameter(s)

When designing a new machine or facility, there is frequently the need to optimize some parameters.
The program gminuit is available for this, and interfaces well to G4beamline (and to other programs).
Download it from http://muonsinc.com in the Computer Programs link at the left.

The basic idea is to write the input.file to have command-line parameters for the parameters to be
optimized, and to configure gminuit to vary them. A shell script must be written to run G4beamline and
then compute a Chi-squared for gminuit to minimize. See the gminuit documentation for details how to
do this. Gminuit will optimize any quantity that can be computed in a shell script, and is not limited to
G4beamline.

In practice, one finds that program overheads are rather large, so there is a big advantage to requiring
fewer iterations. A human can often converge on an optimum faster (fewer iterations) than can gminuit’s
minimizer. This is especially true if the shell script can present a useful graph to the user rather than just
a single value of the Chi-squared. Note also that minimizing an integer-valued expression, such as the #
of particles transported to a given location, is difficult; in gminuit one should set the granularity of
MINUIT to 1.0 or more, and run enough particles so that the statistics are reasonably good (at least
1,000 particles, and 10,000 is better).

The examples directory of the G4beamline distribution contains triplet.sh which tunes a quad triplet to
achieve a focus at z=6000. Note that it presents the user with a plot of the beam’s horizontal and vertical
sizes as a function of z along the beamline – this additional information permits a human to find a
solution much faster than the minimizer (the locations of the horizontal and vertical zero-crossings tell
you which way to change the quads’ values). Even so, using gminuit in manual mode is significantly
easier than it would be to do this by manually typing each command (gminuit presents the user with a
simple way to change the values of the variables and to execute the program once).
### 8.26 Using Two or More Reference Particles

Unlike most accelerator programs, G4beamline realistically handles particle decays and interactions.
This makes it suitable to simulate muon beams from a primary proton beam all the way to a muon
experiment or cooling channel. This means that the portion of the beamline just after the production
target should be optimized for pions, and the portion at the end should be optimized for muons. The best
way to do this is to use two reference particles, one starting at the production target with particle=pi+,
and one starting at a suitable downstream point with particle=mu+. The key point is that no tuning

should be done in the region where both reference particles are tracked. In exampleAUG05.in, the pion
reference hits an aperture and is killed. If this does not happen naturally, you could use a particlefilter to
kill the pion reference at an appropriate place. Tuning will get confused if multiple reference particles
enter the tune region.
### 8.27 Fitting to Plots and Histograms in HistoRoot

A major advantage of using HistoRoot is the fact that it is based on Root [5] and has all of the Root
features at its disposal. This includes the ability to fit functions to plots and histograms. The Root user
interface is quirky, but quite functional.

To fit a function to a histogram, first generate the plot containing the histogram. Right-click on the
histogram itself (one of its bins, not the canvas and not any axis or other object – the cursor changes
from cross to arrow when clicking will select the histogram; that’s what you want), and then select
FitPanel. The FitPanel lets you select from among a number of pre-defined functions and a user-defined
function:

Name
Description
gaus
A Gaussian distribution.
gausn
A normalized Gaussian distribution.
expo
An exponential distribution.
landau
A Landau distribution.
landaun
A normalized Landau distribution.
pol0 – pol9
A polynomial of order 0 through 9.
user
A user-defined function: use "[0]", "[1]", ... for the parameters to be fitted, and
make it a function of the variable "x" (or "x" and "y"). For instance, here is a
1-d Gaussian: [0]*exp(-0.5*(x-[1])*(x-[1])/([2]*[2])) (parameters are: constant,
mean, sigma). Note that after typing a user expression you MUST do "Set
parameters", or you will get an error "Function with name ... does not exist".

There is a button to set the initial values and ranges of the parameters for the selected function. There are
a number of options. If you select “Use range”, then the double-slider below becomes active and will set
the range of the fit (displayed visually in the plot as you move the slider ends). When fitting, it is useful
to check the plot’s menu item Options/FitParameters so the fit results are displayed in the statistics panel
of the plot (you can drag its edges to make it larger, and its font will scale). For further details, see the
Root documentation.

Note that if you want to play with backgrounds, you can select Options/CanEditHistograms – then with
the mouse you can drag any histogram bin’s value up or down as you wish. You can then re-fit to see
how your changes affect the results.
### 8.28 Interfacing to Other Programs

Many different file formats are used in physics today, and no program can implement all of them.
G4beamline supports ASCII file formats that are suitable for interfacing to other programs, including
both track files and field maps. A conversion program in C or Java can easily be written to read an

ASCII file and write another in a different format (e.g. new order of items, different units, etc.). Root
files can also be converted – Root [5] is quite powerful, and can easily be scripted using C++ macros. It
is straightforward to open a root file, select a TNtuple from it, loop over its rows, and write a new Root
file and TNtuple (or ASCII file) in a new format. The Root documentation and examples contain
numerous macros of this sort. If you have need for an interface that cannot easily be implemented, you
can suggest a new feature for G4beamline to implement it directly (see section 8.3).
### 8.29 EventID and TrackID, and Encoding Information in them

In G4beamline, EventID is an integer between -2 and 2,147,483,647 (0x7FFFFFFF), inclusive. Note,
however, that EventID-s greater than 16777215 (0xFFFFFF) cannot be precisely represented in a float
and their values in any NTuple will be rounded. Values -2 and -1 are reserved for the Tune and
Reference particles.

In G4beamline, TrackID is an integer between 1 and 2,147,483,647 (0x7FFFFFFF), inclusive. Similarly,
TrackID-s greater than 16777215 (0xFFFFFF) cannot be precisely represented in a float and their values
in any NTuple will be rounded. In addition, the beam command will issue a warning for every primary
TrackID greater or equal to the value of secondaryTrackID (such a primary TrackID could be confused
with a secondary’s automatically-generated TrackID).

Note there is no requirement that either EventID or TrackID be unique or sequential. When G4beamline
generates events, the EventID-s are assigned sequentially from 1, the primary TrackID-s are assigned
sequentially from 1 within each event, and secondary TrackID-s are assigned sequentially from the
secondaryTrackID argument to the beam command (default=1001).

This means that when generating a beam file to be read into G4beamline, you can assign both EventID-s
and TrackID-s in whatever manner you like, subject to the above constraints. For instance, you could
assign bins to the phase space of a generated beam and set either EventID or TrackID to the bin number
of each track in the beam file. After running G4beamline to determine which tracks are accepted by the
system, a plot of the acceptance can be made by post-processing the output file with knowledge of how
many tracks were generated in each bin.
### 8.30 Examining Outlier Events

It often happens that some sort of puzzling event occurs, or an outlier entry appears in some histogram.
Here is a method to find such events and then visualize them. As a simple example, consider this
bending magnet (red) followed by a virtualdetector (green), with 100 beam tracks shown (blue):

This looks fine, until one runs 1,000 events and histograms x in the virtualdetector – clearly there is an
outlier track at x ~ 1500.

The way to find this event is to use a slider and the EventID features in historoot to select the outlier
event and write a histo_events.txt file:

Note that slider S1 has the same expression as the histogram x – this permits you to use S1 to select just
the outlier event. As the EventID field contains an expression that evaluates to the event # of the NTuple
row, historoot will write all selected EventID-s to the file histo_events.txt (re-writing it repeatedly as the
slider is changed). After selecting just the outlier entry, its EventID will be the only entry in the file.

It is then straightforward to run G4beamline in visualization mode with the eventcuts command to select
just those events listed in the histo_events.txt file:

g4bl file.in ‘eventcuts file=histo_events.txt’ viewer=best

(The eventcuts command could be edited into file.in instead of being placed on the command-line; in
g4blgui the checkbox “HistoRoot Events” puts that eventcuts command into the command-line.) The
result is clear and obvious -- this simulation clearly needs shielding around the bending magnet:

Note: this assumes the default treatment of pseudo-random numbers: the generator is seeded with the
event # before each event. This won’t work if you use the randomseed command to change that.

Note: If your input beam is a file, and that file has multiple tracks with the same event number,
G4beamline will treat each track as a separate event with that event number (see the description of
beams above). That means that if an event selected via eventcuts has (say) three beam tracks, only one of
them need satisfy the conditions used to select the event. The other two tracks with that event # will be
selected by eventcuts but may well look puzzling, as they probably don’t satisfy the conditions, and will
appear as separate tracks in the visualization. Just ignore them.
### 8.31 Increasing the Number of Events Displayed Visually

By default, the maximum number of events displayed in a viewer is 100. To increase this limit to 1000
events, execute this command:

g4ui when=4 “/vis/scene/endOfEventAction accumulate 1000”
### 8.32 Building G4beamline, Adding Your Own Code

There are several reasons why you might want to build G4beamline from source:
• You want to run it on an unsupported system or OS.
• You want to optimize it for your system (e.g. a 64-bit build).
• You want to add your own new feature or code.

Before you can add your own code to G4beamline, you must build it from source. Read BUILD.txt (in
the doc directory of any distribution) for details. Note the required tools and the details of the build
procedure differ for different OSs.

This is an advanced topic not discussed in this users guide.

### 8.33 Displaying Magnetic Field Lines

The fieldlines command will display magnetic field lines. Due to the difficulty of finding fields without
user assistance, you must specify a point (in global coordinates) near which to start the field lines; this
point is used as the center of a circle of specified radius. The plane of the circle is normal to the B field
at its center. Within the circle, field lines are placed with density that is inversely proportional to |B|.
You must also specify the approximate number of field lines to draw; due to the algorithm used this is
only approximate.

Within the circle, the initial points of the field lines are allocated as follows: an NxN square grid is
placed so it circumscribes the circle; initially all points outside the circle are excluded. An initial value
of scale is guessed. As each line is placed, all grid points within scale/|B| of its location in the circle are
excluded. The next point is placed at the un-excluded grid point that is closest to the center of the circle,
and nearby grid points are excluded. This continues until all grid points have been excluded. If the total
number of field lines placed is within a factor of 2 of the desired number, this set is accepted and the
field lines are drawn. If the number placed is too small, scale is reduced and the procedure is repeated; if
the number placed is too large, scale is increased and the procedure is repeated. At most 10 iterations are
permitted. This implies that asking for fewer than 5 lines, or more than 1,000 lines, is likely to be
ineffective. This algorithm gives a good distribution of field lines for solenoids and other simple fields.

Once the lines are placed within the circle, for each one the B field is traced in both directions; there are
three criteria for stopping drawing a given half-line:
a. The line intersects the plane of the circle (i.e. it has come back to the plane, but outside the
magnet).
b. The value of |B| falls below minField.
c. The field line leaves the simulated world.

There are additional arguments to the fieldlines command that control the drawing.

Remember the field lines are drawn in 3 dimensions, so they won’t look like the pictures in a textbook.
This is a feature, not a bug, and using the best viewer to examine the system from different angles can
give a good understanding of the field lines.
### 8.34 Setting the Phase of RF Cavities (rfdevice)

A rfdevice may describe either just single RF cell or a whole multicell RF structure which shares a
common RF phase.  It is important to note that G4beamline defines 0○ RF to be the rising slope of the
zero crossing of the RF waveform, so 90○ RF is on-crest for a positive particle.  This is a common, but
not universal convention.

The phase of an RF device (rfdevice) may be set in a number of ways.  The timing process is local to a
single rfdevice; tuning uses other elements to adjust parameters.  Timing is done first and is described
here, while tuning is described in the next section. Examples and many details on timing RF cavities are
given in section 8.6; this is just a very brief summary.

The most basic way to time an RF cavity is to explicitly set its timeOffset, the absolute time by which
the fields are translated.  timeOffset includes all phase information.  The electric field is of the form:

E(x,y,z) * sin( ω (t - timeOffset) )
and the magnetic field:
B(x,y,z) * -cos( ω (t - timeOffset) )

The rfdevice will try to find a consistent solution based on what it is told; both under- or over-
specifying the system are fatal errors.   If both timeOffset and maxGradient are specified, nothing more
needs to be determined.

If timeOffset is unspecified, a timingMethod must be used to determine the global (“BASE”) timing of
0○ RF.  For most applications timeMethod=maxE is preferred, in which the time of maximum energy
gain of a positive particle is taken to be 90○ RF.  The default timeMethod=atZ emulates the old rfdevice
behavior, in which timeOffset  is chosen such that ω(t-timeOffset)=phaseAcc at the timingAtZ (usually
the rfdevice center) location.  In most cases, the maxStep ought to be set to ~1 mm, as the default step
size is too large.  The method launches Tune (Event# -2) particles and uses them to find a solution. The
timing of deflecting cavities is discussed in section 8.6.

rfdevice ... timingMethod=maxE maxStep=1 ...
maxGradient=(ΔV/L) MV/m
phaseAcc=(φ) degRF
maxGradient=(ΔV/L) MV/m
fixEnergyGain=(ΔE) MeV
maxGradient=(ΔV/L) MV/m
fixMomentum=(|Pout|) MeV/c
timeOffset=(tabsolute) ns
maxGradient=(ΔV/L) MV/m
Common phase-setting option combinations.

The arguments to the rfdevice command are described in section 5, and section 8.6 describes setting it
up in more detail, but briefly one can fix some parameters while the rfdevice routine will attempt to fill
in the remaining parameters; if it fails, G4beamline reports a fatal error.   The final result of the timing
for each rfdevice is printed to stdout

See also section 2.11 (Tuning the Beamline).

### 8.35 Tuning the maxGradient of RF Cavities (rfdevice)

When RF cavities are used, it is generally necessary to carefully adjust their maxGradient so the output
beam has the desired energy or momentum. The operators of the machine arrange for this either
manually or via an automated feedback system.  In G4beamline this can be done two ways.

The first is the autoTiming technique and it is local to just its own rfdevice, requiring no information
from downstream locations.  In this method, generally both the appropriate timingMethod=maxE and the
step size maxStep ought to be specified, as the defaults may not be good choices.

rfdevice ... timingMethod=maxE maxStep=1 ...
timeOffset=(tabsolute) ns
fixMomentum=(|Pout|) MeV/c

phaseAcc=(φ) degRF
fixEnergyGain=(ΔE) MeV
phaseAcc=(φ) degRF
fixMomentum=(|Pout|) MeV/c
Common gradient-finding option combinations

The second technique requires the tune command and is done while tracking the Tune (Event# -2)
particle, usually in parallel with setting their phases (see previous section).  The tune command defines a
“tune variable” and will arrange to save the Tune particle at one Z-position (z0), track the Tune particle
to a second Z-position (z1), and then evaluate an expression using track fields. It then varies its tune
variable in an attempt to make the expression evaluate to 0.0. This of course requires that some relevant
beamline elements between z0 and z1 use the tune variable to change their behavior appropriately. In
this case we’ll vary the maxGradient of all RF cavities between z0 and z1, and use an expression at z1
that makes the Tune particle have the desired momentum, which we’ll take as 1 GeV/c to within 1
keV/c:

tune Grad z0=990 z1=41010 initial=10.0 step=0.5 \
expr=Pz1-1000 tolerance=0.001

rfdevice Cavity maxGradient=Grad frequency=0.201 \
innerLength=400 ...

place Cavity z=1000 copies=100

Note that z0 must come before the first Cavity is placed, and z1 must be after the last Cavity is placed, at
the location where the 1 GeV/c beam is desired.  See also section 2.11 (Tuning the Beamline).

9 Advanced Topics
### 9.1 Writing Scripts Using G4beamline

By using parameters in your input.file you can automate running G4beamline programs, without having
to script the editing of your input.file.
#### 9.1.1 Using a Linux Cluster or Multi-CPU System

Because the pseudo-random number generator is seeded with the Event number before the start of each
event, all that is necessary to run jobs in parallel is to ensure that they do not run the same events and
that they write to different output files. The arguments firstEvent and lastEvent to the beam command
facilitate this. The basic idea is to use parameters for firstEvent and lastEvent and pass them in on the
command-line, and write a shell script to submit multiple jobs to the cluster with disjoint ranges for each
job. Here the output file corresponds to the first event number. The input.file looks like this:

# give defaults for ease in testing
param –unset first=0 last=1000
# use $first for the Root file (.root will be appended)
param histoFile=$first
output $histoFile.out
beam Gaussian firstEvent=$first lastEvent=$last ...

Any other output files (e.g. format=ascii for virtualdetector, zntuple, timentuple, etc.) should be set to
$first as well, so multiple instances of the program won’t overwrite output files.

The simulation is run like this on a 4-CPU system (bash shell):
g4bl input.file first=0 last=999999 &
g4bl input.file first=1000000 last=1999999 &
g4bl input.file first=2000000 last=2999999 &
g4bl input.file first=3000000 last=3999999 &
tail –f 0.out  # watches the output from the first instance
Or:
tail –1 *.out  # gives a snapshot of where each instance is

The output files will be 0.root, 1000000.root, 2000000.root, and 3000000.root. The historoot program
can be used to generate histograms:
historoot *.root
You can select the 4 instances of a given NTuple and historoot will generate histograms and plots
containing results from all 4 million events.

The example MICE_StageVI.g4bl is a real-world example using this technique.

#### 9.1.2 Using the gminuit Program to Tune Values

The gminuit program (http://www.muonsinc.com [ComputerPrograms/Gminuit]) was specifically
designed to permit the easy tuning of values in an input.file for G4beamline. Because any argument to
any G4beamline command can be set from a parameter, and any parameter can be set on the
G4beamline command line, gminuit can be used to tune any value in your input.file based on any

criterion you can script. It is possible to determine the gminuit value to minimize by either reading the
output from G4beamline with steppingVerbose=1 (tailor steppingFormat to suit), or by reading the file
generated by virtualdetector format=ascii or trace format=ascii. Remember that most shells only do
integer arithmetic, so it is appropriate to use a tcl or perl script to interpret the G4beamline output and
return a value for gminuit to minimize. See the gminuit documentation for details. The file
examples/triplet.sh is an example that uses gminuit to tune a quad triplet.
### 9.2 Violating the Rules on Geometrical Intersections

Geant4 tracks particles through the geometry hierarchy by looking for the next geometrical boundary
along the track’s path, and arranging so there is a step that ends at each boundary crossed by the track.
To keep the search for boundaries efficient, Geant4 only looks for the outer boundary of the current
volume and for boundaries of all daughter volumes of the current volume. So if sibling volumes A and B
overlap, if the track enters A first, then it will be tracked in A through the region of intersection; but if it
enters B first then it will be tracked in B through the region of intersection. Similarly, if a daughter A1
of A extends outside volume A, then if the track is in A1 it can be tracked in A1 even outside of A; but
if it comes in from the sibling or parent of A it won’t enter A1 until it enters A.

While violating the rules is risky and discouraged, if you are careful they can be violated when
necessary (e.g. it is not possible or too difficult to describe the geometry correctly). If the invalid
intersections don’t matter, then they won’t affect the result of the simulation. They won’t matter if all
volumes involved have the same material and none of them is “active” (in G4beamline that means they
aren’t a virtualdetector or detector). They also won’t matter if the regions of intersection are in places
where no particles are tracked (e.g. far from the beamline aperture). And they won’t matter if either of
the intersecting volumes has kill=1.

The automatic geometry test in G4beamline verifies the geometry hierarchy by testing points on the
surface of each element’s volume, verifying that each point is inside the parent volume of the element,
and is outside every sibling volume. The points are selected to test “corners” first, and then points are
randomly distributed over the faces of the surface of the volume. This is not perfect, but it does catch
nearly all invalid intersections.

Geant4 also has other methods of verifying the geometry hierarchy. See the Geant4 user’s manual [1].
They involve shooting geantinos through the detector and verifying that the boundaries each one crosses
are ordered properly. They can be executed using the g4ui command.
### 9.3 Making a Movie

G4beamline now supports the ability to make a movie of the beam, with the camera sitting on the
reference particle watching the other beam particles “dance” around nearby. The implementation is quite
flexible, and permits the user to specify multiple simultaneous panes, each displaying an arbitrary pair of
expressions using the track variables. An example movie is viewable at
http://g4beamline.muonsinc.com. Here is its first frame:

This movie is of Example1.g4bl, in which a Gaussian muon beam propagates through free space into
four virtualdetector-s (which are invisible in the movie). The movie is 10 seconds long, during which the
“y vs. x” pane’s particles grow considerably, and the two lower panes’ ellipses rotate in the usual
manner. A handful of decay electrons and neutrinos become visible.

Making a movie requires the following prerequisites:
1. Installation/configuration requirements:
a. G4beamline version 1.16 (or later).
b. Root version 5.20 (or later).
c. A C++ compiler that Root can use in ACLiC mode.
d. You must use the command-line to run g4blmovie; on Windows this requires Cygwin [7].
e. The ffmpeg program [8] must be installed (it converts a series of frame images into a
movie).
2. G4beamline simulation requirements:
a. There must be a reference particle.
b. The movie command must be included. Note that once you have a working simulation,
this can be given on the command line:
g4bl input.file movie ...
3. g4blmovie command-line program
a. It is included in the G4beamline distribution (1.16 and later).

b. Note that so far this has been used only on Mac OS X; it is expected to work on other
platforms but has not yet been tested.

The basic approach is to first run a G4beamline simulation, with the input.file containing the movie
command, and with a Root output file. The movie command arranges to generate several NTuples in the
Root file that will be plotted to make the movie. This is quite similar to the trace command that traces
all tracks into a single NTuple, so the output file can grow quite large. Note that a movie containing
more than a few hundred particles tends to be so crowded that details are not visible. Once the
simulation is complete, the g4blmovie command is run, which has its own input file to describe the
movie. This program uses Root to read the movie NTuples and generate a series of image files; it then
runs ffmpeg to convert them into the desired movie, and then deletes the image files. Note that movies
can get large, and the production process requires about triple the disk space of the final movie; a 10second movie at 24 frames/second is typically about a megabyte long (these rather un-natural images
don’t compress very well).

The new g4blmovie command has one argument, an input file to describe the movie. This gives great
flexibility in organizing the picture as a number of panes, each displaying a pair of expressions using the
track variables. The panes are laid out in rows, with no inherent limit on either the number of panes in a
row or on the number of rows, but too many of either will probably make the movie unwatchable. The
input file is quite similar to that of G4beamline, except that quoted arguments are not allowed, spaces
are not permitted (or needed) in any argument, and there are no parameters.

g4blmovie input file commands
Command Argument
Description
setup

This command must be first. It sets basic parameters for the movie.
outputFile
The output movie file. Its extension determines the format – any
format supported by ffmpeg can be used. The following extensions
are known to work: .mov, .swf, .avi. Beware: spaces are not allowed.
windowWidth
The movie window width, in pixels. All panes scale to this value.
windowHeight The movie window height, in pixels. All panes scale to this value.
tMin
The simulation’s start time of the movie (ns).
tMax
The simulation’s end time of the movie (ns).
duration
The real time duration of the movie in seconds (10).
frameRate
The frame rate of the movie, frames/sec (24).
textHeight
The default height of text, in pixels (15). Changeable in other
commands.
background
The background color (#F3F3F3 – light gray). Changeable in other
commands.
borderColor
The color of the borders between panes (#C0C0C0).
borderSize
The size of the borders, in pixels (5).
marker
The marker to use (21 – the square marker). This marker is used for
all particles (but see the particle command below to color them). Note
that other markers, such as 20 (filled circle), can greatly slow down
the movie production.
markerSize
The relative size of the marker (1.0).

pictureType
The extension of the pictures used to generate the movie (jpg). Other
types known to both Root and ffmpeg can be used, but jpg has given
the best performance.
particle

Sets the color for each particle type.
*
Arguments are of the form: 13=#0000FF, where 13 is the PDGid of
the particle, and #0000FF is the color (6 hex digits, 2 each for red,
green, and blue; #000000 is black, #FFFFFF is white, and #0000FF is
bright blue). The ‘#’ is required. PDGid 0 applies to all unset particles
(defaults to black).
plot

Displays a plot of two expressions.
filename
The name of the Root file to use. If omitted, uses the most recently
opened Root file (i.e. from the previous command). Note the NTuple
names to use are fixed: Movie/Reference and Movie/Tracks.
title
Title of the plot (defaults to “y vs. x”, where x and y are the
expressions).
x
Expression involving the track variables to plot horizontally.
Variables: x, y, z, Px, Py, Pz, t, PDGid, EventID, TrackID, ParentID,
Weight. The standard C functions and operators can be used.
y
Expression involving the track variables to plot vertically.
xMin
Left limit of the plot, in whatever coordinates are used by x.
xMax
Right limit of the plot, in whatever coordinates are used by x.
yMin
Bottom limit of the plot, in whatever coordinates are used by y.
yMax
Top limit of the plot, in whatever coordinates are used by y.
background
Color of the background (setup value)
textHeight
Height of text in pixels. If omitted, the value from the setup command
is used.
sideview

Displays a side view of the apparatus using Reference Coordinates,
with a moving marker that indicates where the reference particle is
located at the current time.
markerSize
The relative size of the marker (1.0).
filename
The name of the Root file to use. If omitted, uses the most recently
opened Root file (i.e. from the previous command). Note the NTuple
names to use are fixed: Movie/Reference and Movie/Elements.
zMin
Left limit of the plot, in Reference Coordinates (synonym is xMin).
zMax
Right limit of the plot, in Reference Coordinates (synonym is xMax).
yMin
Bottom limit of the plot, in Reference Coordinates.
yMax
Top limit of the plot, in Reference Coordinates.
title
Title of the view (“”).
textHeight
Height of text in pixels (setup value).
background
Color of the background (setup value)
row

Initiates a new row of plots.
height
The relative height of this row. The first row has a height of 1.0,
which sets the scale.
space
(none)
Displays like a plot, but is empty.
title
Title of the pad (“”).

textHeight
Height of text in pixels (setup value).
background
Color of the background (setup value)
time
(none)
Displays like a plot, but contains the current time (in ns).
title
Title of the pad (“”).
textHeight
Height of text in pixels (setup value).
background
Color of the background (setup value)
Position

(none)
Displays like a plot, but contains the current Z position of the
reference particle (mm).
title
Title of the pad (“”).
textHeight
Height of text in pixels (setup value).
background
Color of the background (setup value)

Within a row, all plots share equally the total width of the window. The rows are laid out to use the
entire height of the window, but the fraction of each row is determined by its height/totalHeight
(totalHeight is the sum of height for all rows). There can be a different number of plots in each row. You
can use windowWidth, windowHeight, the row height-s, and the number of panes per row to have both
large and small panes in one movie. Usually each pane should be approximately square. To play with
the layout, it is helpful to temporarily set tMax and duration to small values to speed up the production
until the layout is what you want. Many simulations start at t=0, and for them it is best to set tMin to a
small value (e.g. 0.001) so the initial tracks show up in the viewer when the file is opened but not
playing.

Here is the examples/Movie.in file that generated the example1 movie referenced above:

# Movie from example1.in with movie command -- outputs a Flash
setup outputFile=example1.swf tMin=0.001 tMax=18 duration=10
# e+=red, mu+=blue, others=gray (neutrinos)
particle -11=#FF0000 -13=#0000FF 0=#808080
plot filename=g4beamline.root xMin=-800 xMax=800 yMin=-800 \
yMax=800 x=x y=y
plot xMin=-50 xMax=50 yMin=-50 yMax=50 x=Px y=Py
row
plot xMin=-800 xMax=800 yMin=-50 yMax=50 x=x y=Px
plot xMin=-800 xMax=800 yMin=-50 yMax=50 x=y y=Py
row height=0.1
time

Here are the commands used to generate and display that movie:
cd g4beamline-1.16-Darwin-g++/examples
g4bl example1.in movie
g4blmovie movie.in
open example1.swf

### 9.4 Multiple Instances of G4beamline using MPI

The Message Passing Interface (MPI) is a standard interface that permits multiple jobs on multiple
computer systems to cooperate in a single computation. One executes a single MPI job that simulates the
events specified in the input.file; internally it uses multiple ranks (instances) running simultaneously,
collecting their output into a single set of NTuples (in a single Root file by default). Only the tracking is
parallelized, but that is “trivially parallelizable” and the overheads are low; it scales quite well to many
processors depending on the details of both the system being simulated and the computer hardware. On
a Mac Pro running Mac OS X with 16 cores, the management and communication overhead is only a
few percent. On a supercomputer at NERSC (Cori), a large and complex simulation can profitably use
thousands of cores.

Note that MPI is not configured for the distributions of G4beamline. It is too system-specific for that.
You must install some MPI implementation and then build G4beamline from source.

G4beamline implements MPI when the argument “-DG4BL_MPI=ON” is given to cmake when building
the program. While it is a general implementation compliant with MPI 2, it has been tested only on the
following systems:
• Mac OS X 10.9.5 with OpenMPI [11] installed, on a Mac Pro with 8 dual-thread cores.
• Supercomputers Cori and Edison at NERSC [12].
Note the file MPI.cmake must be modified for the configuration of your system (see BUILD.txt in
Appendix 2). Using MPI on a Linux box or cluster ought to be very similar to Mac OS X; NERSC runs
a supercomputer version of Linux. The configurations for all of these are in MPI.cmake so you can base
your system’s configuration on them.

Once built for MPI, G4beamline is written such that it can be run in either single-CPU or MPI mode. If
you just run it by itself via the g4bl program, via the g4blgui program, or via an icon, it runs without
MPI as a single, local process. But if it is run via the g4blmpi program, then it runs the specified number
of instances and operates in MPI mode, via mpirun, aprun, or srun (depending on which is available).

In MPI terminology, each instance of the program is called a “rank”; the ranks are enumerated by a nonnegative integer unique to each instance of the program, assigned by the MPI system sequentially from
0. For G4beamline, rank number 0 is the master-controlling instance, and all other ranks are worker
instances (nodes). The usual command is:

g4blmpi 5 input.file [… parameters]

This command acts very nearly like a single G4beamline program simulating input.file, except it uses 5
instances to speed up the computation. The basic operation is:
1. Start 5 instances of the g4beamline program, using the system’s MPI mechanism to start them.
2. Each instance of g4beamline determines that it was run in MPI mode, and gets its rank number
from the MPI library.
3. The rank 0 instance does the following:
a. Reads input.file, constructs the geometry, the physics list, etc.
b. Creates an output file for each NTuple (one file for all Root NTuples).
c. It loops, processing messages from worker nodes, of which there are three basic types:

i. A message indicating the worker is idle; rank 0 responds by sending it a block of
beam tracks to process, sending 0 tracks if none are left.
ii. A message containing NTuple rows; rank 0 responds by writing them to the
appropriate NTuple file.
iii. A message indicating the worker took an exception; rank 0 prints it (throttled as
usual for many identical exceptions). If the exception is fatal, that is
communicated to all worker nodes, and the program terminates gracefully.
d. When all events have been processed, and all worker nodes have indicated they have
exited, rank 0 terminates.
4. The instances with rank > 0 do the following:
a. Reads input.file, constructs the geometry, the physics list, etc.
b. Configures all NTuples to send their rows to rank 0 rather than writing to any file.
c. Sends a message to rank 0 indicating it is idle.
d. Waits for a message from rank 0 containing a block of beam tracks to process.
e. If the message contains 0 beam tracks, sends any un-sent NTuple rows to rank 0 (i.e.
flushing their buffers), and then exits.
f. Otherwise, processes the received beam tracks.
g. Loops back to c.
Error and exception handling is not mentioned above; it significantly complicates the code. G4beamline
makes a valiant attempt to always closeup gracefully, but when the system terminates the job that may
not be possible. Results are usually lost when a worker node runs out of memory, when the job exceeds
its wall clock limit, or when the job is killed by the system.

The following parameters control the MPI implementation:
MPI_PackTracks
Number of beam tracks per message (default=100).
MPI_PackNTuples
Number of NTuple rows per message (default=1000).
MPI_IdleSleep
Sleep time (milliseconds) of the sleep in a loop calling MPI_Iprobe();
see below.
MPI_WorkerOutput
Controls whether each worker writes to rank#.out (0 = not). Default = 1.
Rank 0 always writes to stdout and stderr; worker nodes never do.
MPI_Debug
Controls MPI debugging output. Default = 0.
In addition, the parameter MPI_rank is set to the rank of the process; as each rank processes the
input.file, this can be used for debugging or distinguishing output files. It is set to -1 if MPI was built but
the run is in non-MPI mode. It is not set if MPI was not configured and built.

Rank 0 writes to stdout and stderr in the usual way; all other ranks have both stdout and stderr redirected
to files ‘rank#.out’, or closed if MPI_WorkerOutput=0. G4Exceptions will be displayed on both
rank#.out and stdout, and the rank 0 process totals them over all ranks. stdin is normally readable by
rank 0, but that won’t work as an input.file (because all ranks must read it).

Note that rank 0 only does management tasks, and performs no tracking of beam. On a Mac Pro with 8
two-thread cores, it is appropriate to run 17 ranks, as rank 0 needs only a few percent of a core. On a
supercomputer using hundreds of cores, rank 0 should have its own core. By default, MPI message
passing does not block, in order to reduce message latency. This means that rank 0 will use 100% of a
core, even though it does very little processing. On a supercomputer with hundreds of ranks working
that is appropriate, but it is wasteful on a small computer with just a handful of cores. Setting

MPI_IdleSleep=1 will make rank 0 sleep for 1 millisecond when it is idle (i.e. is not processing a
message from a worker). On a 4-core computer running 5 ranks, this can improve throughput by about
20%. Larger values only reduce throughput.

There is little point in changing either MPI_PackTracks or MPI_PackNTuples; larger values do not help,
and smaller values only reduce throughput.

The parallel performance of G4beamline on your simulation will depend on a) the speed of the CPUs, b)
the speed and latency of the network among them, and c) the size of the system being simulated. See
section 9.4.2 below.

Some aspects of G4beamline have their operation modified in MPI mode:
steppingVerbose=1 Performed independently on each rank, writing to files
‘rank#.out’ (unless MPI_WorkerOutput=0).
fieldntuple
printfield
probefield
Performed only in rank 1, to avoid duplication. (These
commands are not normally used in MPI mode, as they are
primarily for debugging.)
trace
Performed only in rank 1, to avoid duplication. In ASCII format,
the annotations are lost (blank lines between tracks, and a
comment giving EventID and TrackID).
profile
totalenergy
Sum up over all workers at the end of the run, before printing
from rank 0.
printf
Always prints from rank 0 (via messages from workers). As long
as each printf command is < 1 kByte, and all printf-s for a single
event are < 32 kBytes, the output from different events will not
be intermixed (but the order of events is not preserved).
spacecharge
spacechargelw
collective
Collective mode is incompatible with MPI. This will probably
change in the future.
Visualization
Visualization is incompatible with MPI. A single build can
enable both visualization and MPI, but they cannot be used
together.
Windows
MPI is not supported on Windows.
#### 9.4.1 Signals

G4beamline responds to signal SIGUSR1 by flushing all NTuples to disk. So for a long job you can look
at intermediate results.

G4beamline responds to signal SIGUSR2 by closing up and exiting cleanly. In each worker this is
detected between events. This is especially useful at NERSC, as SIGUSR1 and SIGUSR2 are the only
signals users can send to the application; all others cause immediate termination without saving results.
#### 9.4.2 Estimating how many workers to use

In general, if your simulation runs >100 events/sec on a typical core, then MPI will probably max out
around 10-20 ranks, because the serial operations in rank 0 will saturate. For a simulation that runs 13

ev/sec on a Hopper worker node, rank 0 saturates around 800 workers. From the parallelization plots in
section 9.4.4 below, it’s clear that on Hopper rank 0 saturates around 8,000 events per second. There are
several design and code changes that could be done to mitigate the rank 0 bottleneck, but for now this is
not considered serious enough to warrant development.

Note that a larger number of messages per event will reduce the number of workers that can be used
effectively, because the serial I/O in rank 0 will dominate. So for high performance, avoid printf,
steppingVerbose=1, trace, and a large number of NTuples.

There can be rather large overheads in starting each MPI process; on Hopper, 1600 ranks can take
several minutes to start up (from rank 0 starting to the last worker processing its first event). Startup is
loosely but not strictly in rank order.

The best way to estimate how many workers to use is to plot the performance (events per second) as a
function of the number of workers. When rank 0 becomes saturated, the events per second will likewise
saturate. Usually a few minutes will suffice for each point, and you can use the wallClockLimit
parameter to terminate the jobs. Be sure it is large enough for all workers to start up – if they don’t all
start up, the symptom is a droop in the Events/sec vs. nWorkers plot (as in Benchmark2 on hopper,
below, for 1600 workers). Another symptom of not all workers starting up would be an exception “Not
all Workers Contributed Data”, for the profile or totalenergy commands.
#### 9.4.3 MPI on Mac OS X with OpenMPI

Here is how I built OpenMPI on my Mac:
./configure --disable-dlopen --enable-static --disable-shared \

--disable-mpi-f77 --disable-mpi-f90 --prefix=/usr/local
make
make install
If you have other systems on a network that could be used via MPI, install OpenMPI on them and
configure it to use them. My instance of OpenMPI only uses the cores on my machine, and message
passing is via shared memory.

After installing OpenMPI, build G4beamline from source (Appendix 2).
Note MPI.cmake must be configured for your system; use it to teach the build system how to incorporate
MPI.

The program runs in single-core mode with visualization (via g4bl, g4blgui, or icon), or in MPI mode
(via g4blmpi). Using a visualization viewer in MPI mode is not supported.

The best performance on my Mac Pro with 8 2-thread cores is with 17 ranks and MPI_IdleSleep=1. But
using 15 ranks is only slightly slower and leaves a thread for the human user.
#### 9.4.4 MPI on hopper.nersc.gov

On Hopper you must select which compiler to use, both for building and for running. For G4beamline,
the best compiler to use is gnu.

Note the export of variables CC and CXX, to prevent the Makefile from using the defaults (which are an
old version of gcc and g++ which you do NOT want to use). MPI is already known by the compiler.

Be sure to do “module load PrgEnv-gnu” in your batch script to qsub (it is needed to find shared
objects).

On Hopper, use the default MPI_IdleSleep=0.

NOTE: Hopper does not have a very good method of detecting when memory is exhausted on a worker
node (even though G4beamline itself does). You really want to avoid running out of memory, as Hopper
does not permit the job to closeup gracefully, and all results will probably be lost. The message “OOM
killer terminated this process” indicates the job was killed due to a worker node being Out Of Memory.

If you are part of a project that uses G4beamline, there may already be an installation of G4beamline for
your project. For the Muon Accelerator Program (MAP), look in /project/projectdirs/map/Codes.

Here is an example script for submission via qsub:
#PBS -q debug
#PBS -l mppwidth=24
#PBS -l walltime=00:30:00
#PBS -N Benchmark
#PBS -j eo
source /project/projectdirs/map/bin/compiler gnu
source /project/projectdirs/map/Codes/G4beamline/bin/g4bl-setup.sh
cd $PBS_O_WORKDIR
g4blmpi 24 Benchmark1.g4bl wallClockLimit=240

These parallelization plots were made on hopper.nersc.gov, using the scripts in the Benchmark directory
of the distribution.

Hopper Parallelization Graphs: Benchmark1 and Benchmark2.
### 9.5 G4beamline Helper Programs and Scripts

The basic program for G4beamline is g4bl. In previous versions it was a shell script, but now is a C++
program that runs in all environments (including Windows cmd).

The helper programs are all written in C++ and run in all environments that G4beamline itself can run.
The helper scripts are usable only in these environments:
1. Linux
2. Mac OS X
3. Windows with Cygwin or the Windows Linux Subsystem
The scripts rely on the bash shell, and are therefore not runnable on Windows cmd. They are located in
the bin directory of the installation.
#### 9.5.1 Helper Programs

g4blgui
Provides a Graphical User Interface to G4beamline. It sets up all required
environment variables, and runs g4bl with or without visualization. The standard
output and error streams are displayed in a scrollable pane in the window. This is the
standard interface on Windows and Mac OS X, and is available on Linux.

g4bldata
Manages the Geant4Data directory, which contains the Geant4 data files necessary
for the different physics lists. It provides a GUI that lets the user specify the location
of the directory, select and download the data sets from the CERN website, and
unpack them into the specified destination directory.

g4blmpi
Runs G4beamline in MPI mode. It detects which program is used to run MPI jobs.

g4bltest
Runs regression tests. There are over 100 individual tests, with one or more for each
G4beamline command. Can be run from g4blgui via its Tools menu.
#### 9.5.2 Scripts

g4bl-setup.sh A script to put the G4beamline scripts into the user’s PATH, for the sh class of shells
(sh, bash, ksh, zsh, etc.); must be source-d.

g4bl-setup.csh A script to put the G4beamline scripts into the user’s PATH, for the csh class of
shells (csh, tcsh, etc.); must be source-d.
#### 9.5.3 Implementation Details

Each script or program must determine various aspects of the environment required to run the
g4beamline program:

Install Directory
The environment variable G4BL_DIR points to the install directory. But all
programs can find the install directory without it being set.

ROOTSYS
The Root library works better when this is set to G4BL_DIR.

Physics Datasets
The Geant4 physics processes need various data. The g4bldata script manages
this, and the other programs use it via Geant4Data::setup(). Once installed, the
.data file in the install directory points to the directory containing the
Geant4Data. That directory contains a setup.sh script which sets the
environment variables the Geant4 library expects, plus directories containing
the various datasets.

Library Search Path
On Linux and Mac OS X the lib directory contains shared libraries. On
Windows they are in bin. The executable programs can all find whatever
shared libraries they need. In particular, LD_LIBRARY_PATH and
DYLD_LIBRARY_PATH are not used; they are cleared by g4blgui.
### 9.6 Setting up an rfdevice

It is worth repeating that G4beamline defines 0○ RF to be the rising slope of the zero crossing of the
RF waveform, so 90○ RF is on-crest for a positive particle, while 270○ RF is on-crest for a negative one.
This is a common, but not a universal convention.

For many applications, especially very relativistic beams, setting up the RF is very straightforward.  For
others, such as muon cooling, the beams are relatively slow, phase and gradient are coupled, and
compensating for energy loss in absorbers is the goal rather than simple acceleration.

There are a number of ways to setup the RF.   This autoTiming process is local to a single rfdevice,
while the tune command uses information downstream of the rfdevice.  A brief how-to on timing the RF
is in section 7.34 and adjusting the gradient using tune is in section 7.35.

Everything is totally determined once timeOffset and maxGradient and the fields are known.  The timing
process described here may be used to determine timeOffset  and/or maxGradient of a single RF device,
and may then derive phaseAcc and other quantities.

Inside every rfdevice is a timingVolume.  This object is a cylinder with one face close to the entrance
and the other at the point that will be used to determine the timing; almost always either at the center of
the cavity (the default when using timingMethod=atZlocal) or at the exit (all other methods).  This
timingVolume is immaterial, but it is an object and ought not overlap any other object.  It will be visible
in the graphics if timingDisplay is nonzero.

rfdevice RF1 innerLength=744 color=0.8,0,0.8,0.4 \
frequency=0.20125  maxGradient=25 phaseAcc=70 \
innerRadius=450 pipeThick=1 wallThick=1 irisRadius=230 \
collarRadialThick=0 collarThick=0 win1Thick=0 win2Thick=0 \
winMat=Vacuum winMat=Vacuum cavityMaterial=Vacuum \
maxStep=1 timingMethod=atZ timingDisplay=1

The timing process ignores everything outside of the timingVolume.  The timing process allows one to
specify 2 out of 3 conditions (maxGradient, timeOffset, and fixed outputs)  and it will determine the 3rd
condition, if possible.  If it cannot find a solution, G4beamline will exit with an error message.

For deflecting cavities, the timingVolume is still aligned so the Tune particle enters one face and exits
the other, but the trajectory needs not be normal to the face.

The relationship of the particle and the RF fields is a delicate one; the particle must arrive at the correct
point in the RF cycle and the RF must have the correct voltage.  For slow particles, there is an
interrelationship between the phase and voltage of a cavity, so changing the maxGradient may require
readjusting the timing.

The most basic way to setup an RF cavity is to just explicitly set its timeOffset, the absolute time by
which the fields are translated.  timeOffset includes all phase information.  The electric field is usually of
the form:

E(x,y,z) * sin( ω (t - timeOffset) )

The rfdevice’s UserSteppingAction routine will try to find a consistent solution based on what it
is told; both under- or over- specifying the system are fatal errors.  A Tune (Event# -2) particle is
launched from a spot near the entrance of the timingVolume for each pass within the rfdevice.

If explicitly specified, timeOffset may not be altered by any subsequent requirement, and any attempt to
do so will result in an error message.  If unspecified, timeOffset will be determined according to the set
timingMethod and the subsequent requirements given to rfdevice, and then finally shifted by
timeIncrement.

A method (timingMethod) launches multiple Tune particles (Event# -2) from a spot near the entrance of
the timingVolume and uses them to determine the time associated with 0○ RF.  Once that is complete, a
Tune particle then makes one pass at that setting.  Messages for each step in the procedure will be
printed if timingDisplay=1, and additional messages will be shown if timingDisplay=2.   The process

will continue until changes in the base timing are less than an associated tolerance (timeTolerance); the
default is 0.001 ns.  The tracking step size within the rfdevice ought to be set reasonably small; usually 1
mm works well.

Several methods are provided to determine the base timing; only for special cases of deflecting cavities
or very slow particles will the methods give much differing results.  The default method is
timingMethod=atZlocal, where the timing is adjusted so the particle would arrive at the (local to the
rfdevice) timingZlocal location (default is 0 mm) inside the rfdevice at the appropriate phase (this was
used in earlier versions of G4beamline).  In actual practice, however, most people adjust a real cavity for
maximum energy gain (timingMethod=maxEnergyGain), corresponding to 90○ RF for a positive particle
and 270○ RF for a negative particle.  When using a multicell cavity, the latter method is usually
preferable.

For special cases, including deflecting cavities, other methods of determining the base timing are
available as shown in the following table.  Here the transit time is considered relative to the drift time, so
timingMethod=noTransitTime corresponds to the same transversal time as a simple drift.

Available timingMethods for determining 0○ RF
method
abbreviation default
timingAtZ
description
atZlocal
atZ
middle
used by G4beamline 2.08 and earlier, generally not
used with fix* output requirements
maxEnergyGain maxE
exit
most common method for most RF
noEnergyGain
noE
exit
for RF bunchers
minEnergyGain
minE
exit
for decelerating RF
maxTransitTime maxT
exit
for special applications
noTransitTime
noT
exit
for special applications
minTransitTime
minT
exit
for special applications
maxXdeflection
maxX
exit
for deflecting cavities -
X in local rfdevice’s  coordinates
noXdeflection
noX
exit
for deflecting cavities –
X in local rfdevice’s  coordinates
minXdeflection
minX
exit
for deflecting cavities –
X in local rfdevice’s  coordinates
maxYdeflection
maxY
exit
for deflecting cavities –
Y in local rfdevice’s  coordinates
noYdeflection
noY
exit
for deflecting cavities –
Y in local rfdevice’s  coordinates

minYdeflection
minY
exit
for deflecting cavities –
Y in local rfdevice’s coordinates

After the base timing is determined, the RF phase (section 7.20)  may be explicitly set via phaseAcc or
be determined by specifying maxGradient and a single fixed output quantity (fixEnergyGain,
fixMomentum,  fixTransitTime,  fixXdeflection, or fixYdeflection); the phase is then adjusted to satisfy the
conditions. If a fixed output quantity and the phaseAcc are set, but not maxGradient, both timeOffset and
maxGradient will be adjusted to satisfy the requirements (section 7.21).

Fixed output conditions
fixed output request units
description
fixEnergyGain
MeV
energy gain during transit of timingVolume
fixMomentum
MeV/c momentum at the exit of the timingVolume
fixTransitTime
nS
total transit time of the timingVolume
fixXdeflection
deg
change of direction toward local X
fixYdeflection
deg
change of direction toward local Y

The Tune particle is repeatedly tracked through the cavity as many times as necessary to determine the
timing to the timingTolerance set accuracy.  Independent of which method is used to determine the base
timing, timeOffset   may be further adjusted to satisfy the requested conditions. The total number of
Tune particles/rfdevice is typically between 5 and ~200.  To avoid logging them when using trace,
specify trace keepTune=0.

For deflecting cavities, the deflections are in the coordinate system used to define a cavity, not the
global coordinate system, to avoid ambiguities when placing a cavity in the world.

If the final error on the requested output condition exceeds fixTolerance (the default is 1.E-3 in the same
units as the fixed output), G4beamline will exit with an error message.

Though it is rarely used, timeIncrement is intended for exploring small phase errors of the RF.  If
timeIncrement is set nonzero, it is added to timeOffset after all other timing is complete, and the Tune
particle is then re-tracked.  If the error on a fixed output condition then exceeds fixTolerance,
G4beamline will not report it as a an error.

Timing Algorithm

G4beamline launches a Tune particle; after each step when it is inside the rfdevice (section 5.49)
RfdeviceField::UserSteppingAction is called.  That routine may make changes to the
rfdevice and then push the particle back to the point where it first entered the rfdevice and the repeat the
process.  Often multiple Tune (Event# -2) particles, or passes, are used to setup the RF device.  The
routine’s only points of interest are the entrance and exit of the timingVolume.   The routine is a state

machine associated with a single RF device described by rfdevice; the state is set before returning to
G4beamline.

UserSteppingAction goes through a number of states.  Initially, upon first entering the rfdevice’s
timingVolume, it is in the ATWORKING_UNKNOWN state; if sufficient information exists to
completely define the system, i.e. timeOffset and maxGradient both set explicitly, the state is set to
ATWORKING_DONE.  Otherwise, if timeOffset is set explicitly, the state is set to
ATWORKING_BYPASS, and if not it is set to ATWORKING_OFFSET.  If no maxGradient is
specified, it is set to an estimated reasonable working value.

Upon entering the rfdevice’s timingVolume, various initializations are done, a snapshot is taken of
particle and the track is saved at that point.  Control is returned to G4beamline and the particle
continues, with UserSteppingAction called each step, but it does nothing until the particle exits
the timingVolume.   Then another snapshot is taken, various calculations are done, the conditions and
state changed, and the track returned to the spot just inside the entrance of the timingVolume via the
saved track.  Generally only one Tune particle enters the timingVolume, but many leave it.

It is important the maxStep used by the tracking not be too large.  The default value is usually too large,
while ~1mm seems to work well.

If the state is ATWORKING_OFFSET, the 1st  pass is done with timingZero=0, the 2nd at 90○ RF later.
The output ΔE, Δ(t-tdrift), or Δθx,y may be approximated as:

O = A • sin(ωt + φ)

so taking the first two passes:

O1 = A • sin(φ)
O2 = A • sin(π/2+φ) = A • cos(φ)
gives:

φ= atan(O1/O2)
A= √(O12 + O22)

rfdeviceField::UserSteppingAction algorithm logic states

timing state
description
ATWORKING_UNKNOWN
initial state – no processing done yet
ATWORKING_OFFSET
multiple pass search defines 0○ RF

ATWORKING_BYPASS
iff total timing explicitly fixed
ATWORKING_BASE
single pass at 0○ RF
ATWORKING_ESTIMATE
1st estimate to match requirements
ATWORKING_FINETUNE
fine adjustments to match requirements
ATWORKING_FINAL
final pass with final parameters
ATWORKING_DONE
complete state – all processing done

When using timingMethod=atZlocal, the 3rd pass onward during state=ATWORKING_OFFSET adjusts
the arrival time at timingAtZ to be 90○ RF for a positive particle and 270○ RF for a negative one.  For all
other methods, the 3rd pass places the system near the method’s condition and a simple search is
conducted around it.  The search continues until the time steps are smaller than timingTolerance.

These are used to place the system near the timingMethod’s desired condition; a simple search then
adjusts the value of timingZero to satisfy the condition to the desired timingTolerance accuracy, and
then does a single pass for state ATWORKING_BASE.  While the algorithm is working,  timeOffset =
timingZero+timingPhase/ω.

If the state is ATWORKING_BYPASS and maxGradient was fixed, the state is changed to
ATWORKING_FINAL and a final pass is done; otherwise, it is changed to ATWORKING_BASE.

State ATWORKING_BASE just shows the path of the particle at 0○ RF for verification.  If phaseAcc
was set, it is added onto timeOffset and the state changed to ATWORK_FINAL; otherwise, an estimate
based on the output amplitude and phase from the first 2 passes is used to generate appropriate values
for ATWORKING_ESTIMATE.

After a single pass of state ATWORKING_ESTIMATE, the state is changed to
ATWORKING_FINETUNE and the routine searches for a nearby solution.  If one is found, the state is
changed to ATWORKING_FINAL.  If maxGradient was a guess during the search for 0○ RF, the whole
process is repeated from ATWORKING_OFFSET using the new value of maxGradient as there may be
some dependence of the phasing on the gradient.

In the very rarely used case that timeIncrement is set nonzero to study timing errors, timeOffset is
changed by that amount before the last pass without any further adjustments and the final fixTolerance
test is disabled for the ATWORKING_FINAL.

The state ATWORKING_FINAL just tracks the particle though the rfdevice using the final timing and
maxGradient; this is important to ensure the next device sees the correct Tune particle.  The state is then
changed to ATWORKING_DONE.  If the state is ATWORKING_DONE, the routine always returns
and does nothing.

The choice of timingMethod becomes important when particles are moving slowly.  For illustration,
compare the reference particle tracks through a single 201.25 MHz, 744 mm cavity for 45 MeV/c
(β≈.39) μ+ and (β≈1) e+ with maxGradient=25 MV/m and phaseAcc=90 ○RF using
timingMethod=maxE and atZ.   The e+ trajectories are virtually identical for both methods, while the μ+
trajectories display a distinct difference.

For a multicell cavity with an even number of cells the differences are much more pronounced, as
the center of the cavity will usually be a node in the field map.  For example, consider a similar 2-cell
cavity again with 45 MeV/c μ+ and e+.  For e+, timingMethod=atZ  atZlocal=0 phaseAcc=90 results in
no energy gain while timingMethod=atZ  atZlocal=0  phaseAcc=180 gives the maximum energy gain,
the same as one gets using timingMethod=maxE phaseAcc=90.  For μ+, the situation gets complicated,
but timingMethod=maxE phaseAcc=90 still returns the highest energy gain:

Examples

The old rfdevice set timing based on the middle of the cavity (for backward compatibility
timingMethod=atZ is still the default, but usually ought not to be used with fixed output options), setting
the maximum gradient over the RF cycle to 25 MV/m and placing a positive particle on-crest:

rfdevice rf1 ... maxStep=1 maxGradient=25 phaseAcc=90

A typical case where a positive particle will see some synchrotron motion (later particles see more
acceleration, 20○ before crest):

rfdevice telsa9cell ... maxStep=1 timingMethod=maxE \
phaseAcc=70 maxGradient=40

while to get the same synchrotron motion for a negative particle:

rfdevice tesla9cell ... maxStep=1 timingMethod=maxE \
phaseAcc=250 maxGradient=40

To specify the 8○ before (negative) crest for e-, but request that the output momentum be set to 3 GeV/c:

rfdevice cebaf7cell ... maxStep=1 timingMethod=maxE \
phaseAcc=262.0 fixMomentum=3000

Success ensures that the found maxGradient satisfies both |ΔtimeOffset|<timingTolerance and
||P|-fixMomentum|<fixTolerance.

Building a Cryomodule

Complicated assemblies may be constructed in G4beamline using groups and macros.  Since various
quantities often must be often passed to internal components, macros are used here to construct a
cryomodule.

A rfdevice need not have material walls – it may serve as merely a place to put a known RF field map.
This example rfdevice has no physical components, but does have a field and a timingVolume:

rfdevice RF2 innerLength=$Ldoublecell_iris2iris-$cl \

frequency=$freqGHz fieldMapFile=RF2_1MV_wot.BLfmt \
innerRadius=$innerPipe-$cl pipeThick=0 wallThick=0
\ irisRadius=$innerPipe-$cl collarRadialThick=0 \
collarThick=0 win1Thick=0 win2Thick=0 winMat=Vacuum
timingTolerance=0.000001 cavityMaterial=Vacuum \
maxStep=1 timingMethod=maxE timingDisplay=1

Rfdevice RF2 represents a cylindrical space of length $Ldoublecell_iris2iris (reduced by a tiny
clearance $cl to avoid overlap) with a RF field described by the file RF2_1MV_wot.BLfmt.     A
G4beamline visualization of RF2 would only show the timingVolume if timingDisplay!=0, and would
not show anything at all with timingDisplay=0.

The physical SRF cavity wall may be described as a polycone (section 5.51) made of niobium:

polycone doublecell \

z=$z2i0,$z2i1,$z2i2,$z2i3,$z2i4,$z2i5,...,$z2i21 \
innerRadius=$r2i0,$r2i1,$r2i2,$r2i3,...,$r2i21 \

outerRadius=$r2o0,$r2o1,$r2o2,$r2o3,...,$r2o21 \
material=Nb

Both the rfdevice and polycone may be placed into a macro to keep them into the correct relationship.  In
this case both the timeOffset and phaseAcc will be determined by the timing algorithm to satisfy the
condition that the exiting Tune particle have total momentum Pout.

param RFcolor=0,0.8,0.8,0.6
#                       $1         $2           $3
# doublecellAssembly  <z{mm}>  <Pout{MeV/c}>  <V{MV/m}>
#
define doublecellAssembly \

"place doublecell z=$1 color=$cellcolor " \

"place RF2 z=$1 fixMomentum=$2 maxGradient=$3 rename=rf2_#

doublecellAssembly

The macro may be used as:

#                                                    <z{mm}>       <Pout{MeV/c}>     <maxGradient {MV/m}>
doublecellAssembly     1000      250.0        23.09

Another macro describing a superconducting solenoid, its field map, counterwound conductors, and iron
shield may also be defined:

# solenoidAssembly   <z{mm}>   <current{A}>
solenoidAssembly      500       1.5

Both macros, as well as a couple predefined tubs (section 5.77),   may be placed  inside yet another
macro that constructs a whole cryomodule:

#                   $1        $2          $3            $4

# middleCryomodule <z{mm}> <current{A}> <Pout{MeV/c}> <maxGradient{MV/m}>
#
define middleCryomodule \
"place beamPipe z=$1+$zo_miPipe length=$LmiPipe-$cl rename=miPipe#"\
"solenoidAssembly  $1+$zo_misolenoid   $2   $5"\
"doublecellAssembly  $1+$zo_midoublecell   $3  $4"\
"place beamPipe z=$1+$zo_mivaPipe length=$LmivaPipe-$cl rename=mivaPipe#"\
"place valveAssembly z=$1+$zo_mivalve

Note that macros are invoked, while objects are placed.   For example, to put this cryomodule off the Z
axis, one would need to modify the macro that defines the cryomodule to pass the x and y parameters to
each of the individual place commands within each macro.  Also note that when using field maps, the
current and maxGradient quantities multiply the quantities within the field maps, rather than being
absolute numbers.

middleCryomodule

To actually use the cryomodule:

#
#                 <z>     <current> <Pout>  <maxGradient>

middleCryomodule  $Zcryo9  $j9       $Po9    $V1max
#

Other details, such as virtual detectors, cryostats, and absorbers may be added easily as required.  In this
example, the polycone lay outside of the rfdevice, however, if tracking particles through the cavity far
off axis were required, the rfdevice could have been made larger and the polycone placed inside the
rfdevice, but outside of the timingVolume.

10 File Formats
Note that ASCII file formats begin with comments (‘#’ in column 1) that give both the field names and
their units. The historoot program is able to use these comments to give names to the fields of such files
(it ignores the units, which are intended for humans).
### 10.1 BLTrackFile (generated by NTuple-s, read by beam)

*      The file format is ASCII:
*      Lines beginning with # are comments
*      First line is a structured comment (if not present the input
*      routine issues a warning):
*              #BLTrackFile ... user comment...
*      Second line is a comment giving the column names:
*              #x y z Px Py Pz t PDGid EvNum TrkId Parent weight
*      Third line is a comment giving the units:
*              #cm cm cm MeV/c MeV/c MeV/c ns - - - - -
*      OR:
*              #mm mm mm MeV/c MeV/c MeV/c ns - - - - -
*      (When writing, mm are used; on reading, mm are assumed, but a
*      comment line containing "cm cm cm" switches to cm.)
*
*      Thereafter follow the tracks, one per line. While the input
*      routine can handle initial spaces in the first column, it is
*      STRONGLY suggested you not put any there (so cut/grep will
*      work). Any fixed or floating-point format will do; PDGid,
*      EV#, TrkId, and Parent are integers (but .00 can be appended).
*      Common PDGid-s:
*              e-      11              e+      -11
*              mu-     13              mu+     -13
*              pi+     211             pi-     -211
*              proton  2212            anti_proton -2212
*              neutron 2112            anti_neutron -2112
*              gamma   22
### 10.2 Trace File

When writing track traces with format=ascii in the trace command, the output is as follows:

The first 12 columns are identical to those of BLTrackFile

Columns 13,14,15 give Bx,By,Bz in Tesla

Columns 16,17,18 vive Ex,Ey,Ez in MegaVolts/meter
The first 3 comment lines are similar to those of BLTrackFile, giving a comment, the column names,
and their units. All values are in the selected coordinates from the trace command (centerline, global, or
reference).
### 10.3 FOR009.DAT

FOR009.DAT is the output file from the ICOOL program [14]. G4beamline can write it, but not read it.

*
NOTE: Because the FOR009.DAT format requires the particles be sorted
*
by region (JSRG), all tracks are stored in memory until close() is

*
called; the file is written at that time. The ICOOL region is
*
determined from the Z position of the track, and is simply
*
sequentially assigned as tracks at different Z positions are written.
*
The region is +-REGION_SIZE in Z from the first track of each region.
*
*
XP[], PP[], BFLD[], and EFLD[] should all be converted to
*
Centerline coordinates before calling write().
*
*
This data format comes from ICOOL v 2.77, User's Guide section 4.2.3.
*
The first line of the file is the title.
*
The second and third lines are comments, supposedly units and column
*
labels.
*
There follow the tracks, one per line, sorted by "region". The first
*
track of each region should be the "reference" particle in ICOOL
*
parlance; in g4beamline it is the reference particle -- if multiple
*
reference particles intersect the region, the first will be
*
"reference", and the following ones will be considered "beam".
*
The variables for each track are:
*

IEVT
(I) event #
*

IPNUM
(I) track # for this event
*

IPTYP
(I) particle type: >0 for positive charge,
*

<0 for negative
*

1=e, 2=mu, 3=pi, 4=K, 5=proton
*

IPFLG
(I) "flag", always 0
*

JSRG
(I) region number (see above)
*

TP

(F) time (sec)
*

XP[3]
(F) position (meters)
*

PP[3]
(F) momentum (GeV/c)
*

BFLD[3]

(F) Magnetic field (Tesla)
*

EVTWT
(F) weight
*

EFLD[3]

(F) Electric field (V/meter)
*

SARC
(F) arclength (meter) -- set to 0.0
*

POL[3]

(F) spin -- set to 0.0
*
*
Note that event 0 will be ignored, as that value of IEVT is
*
reserved for the reference particle.
### 10.4 BLFieldMap

*
Blank lines, and lines beginning with # or * are comments. Lines
*
beginning with * are printed to stdout. Units are mm for coordinates,
*
Tesla for B, and MegaVolts/meter for E; use normB and normE if the
*
data points use different units.
*
*
The input file starts with a set of commands to define the parameters
*
of the map, followed by blocks of lines containing the values of the
*
field components. The field component names depend on the type of map
*
(grid: Bx,By,Bz,Ex,Ey,Ez; cylinder: Br,Bz,Er,Ez).
*
Each command has a specific list of arguments to define parameters
*
of the map.
*
*
BEWARE: the parsing is not exhaustive. For instance, invalid arguments
*
are silently ignored (which means you must verify the spelling and
*
capitalization of argument names). Correct inputs will yield correct
*
results, but invalid inputs may not be detected and may yield
*
seemingly-correct but unintended results.

*
*
The first command is usually a param command, which has the following
*
arguments:
*

maxline
The maximum number of characters per line (default=1023)
*

current
The current corresponding to this map (default=1.0)
*

gradient The gradient corresponding to the map (default=1.0)
*

normE A normalization factor for E components (default=1.0)
*

normB A normalization factor for B components (default=1.0)
*
*
Two types of maps are implemented: grid and cylinder.
*
*
grid maps are a 3-D grid, with each block of data being a single
*
X-Y plane; within a block the lines are Y and the columns of each line
*
are values along X.
*
The grid command has the following arguments:
*

X0
The X value for the first value in each line
*

Y0
The Y value for the first line in each block
*

Z0
The Z value for the first block of each field component
*

nX
The number of columns per line
*

nY
The number of lines per block
*

nZ
The number of blocks per field component
*

dX
The X increment between values in each line
*

dY
The Y increment between lines
*

dZ
The Z increment between blocks
*
tolerance
The tolerance for pointwise data (default=0.01 mm)
*
After the grid command, the following optional commands can be given:
*

extendX flip=...
*

extendY flip=...
*

extendZ flip=...
*
These commands permit a half-map to be extended to the full map
*
around X=0, Y=0, or Z=0 respectively. The optional flip argument is a
*
comma-separated list of field components whose signs will be inverted
*
for negative values of the coordinate. For example, "extendZ flip=Bx,Ex"
*
means the map from Z=0 to Z=(nZ-1)*dZ is extended symmetrically around
*
Z=0 to negative Z values, flipping the signs of Bx and Ex when Z<0.
*
This could be followed by "extendX flip=Bx,Ex", and the field flips
*
will be the products of both commands.
*
*
cylinder maps are a 2-D map with rotational symmetry around the Z axis.
*
Each field component has a single block with lines being Z and the
*
columns being R.
*
The cylinder command has the following arguments:
*

Z0
The Z value for the first line in each block
*

nR
The number of columns per line
*

nZ
The number of lines per block
*

dR
The R increment between colums
*

dZ
The Z increment between lines
*
tolerance
The tolerance for pointwise data (default=0.01 mm)
*
After the cylinder command, the following optional commands can be
*
given:
*

extendZ flip=...
*
This command behaves the same as for the grid map.
*
*
After the commands, each block consists of a line containing the
*
name of the field component, followed by the lines of the block.
*
The values within a line can be separated by whitespace or a ','
*
followed by optional whitespace.

*
Field components that are not given are set to 0.0 everywhere.
*
Missing values will be considered to be 0.0.
*
For grid maps the first block is for Z=Z0, and successive blocks
*
increment Z by dZ; the first line in a block is for Y=Y0 and the
*
first column in each line is for X=X0.
*
For cylinder maps, the first line in each block is for Z=Z0 and the
*
first column in each line is for R=0.
*
*
Instead of the blocked input format, a pointwise data format can be
*
used. This is introduced by a line containing the command "data",
*
followed by the individual points of the map, one per line.
*
for a grid field, each line contains values for
*
X,Y,Z,Bx,By,Bz,Ex,Ey,Ez separated by either a comma and optional
*
whitespece or by whitespace. for a cylinder field each line contains
*
values for R,Z,Br,Bz,Er,Ez. The order of the points does not matter;
*
omitted grid points will be 0.0, and for duplicates the last entry
*
wins. If there is no E field, the Ex,Ey,Ez or Er,Ez entries should
*
be omitted on every line. NOTE: every line's X,Y,Z or R,Z must be
*
on a grid point as specified by the arguments to the grid or cylinder
*
commands, to within the tolerance specified; if not, an error message
*
is printed and the input line is ignored.
*
*
For time=dependent fields, the "time" command is used:
*

time [period=12]
*
period, if given, is in nanoseconds, and causes the interval [0,period)
*
to be extended forever (before and after the values given). Because of
*
the interpolation used, at least two points beyond the interval
*
boundaries should be provided; there need not be a point at either
*
boundary (but usually there are).
*
Following the time command are lines containing 2 or 3 doubles:
*

t B E
*
where t is the time (nanoseconds), and B and E are factors for the
*
fields. If E is omitted, the value for B is used. These values will
*
be interpolated in time with a cubic spline that can handle either
*
uniform or non-uniform spacing of points along t.
*
The time command can come either before or after the cylinder or grid
*
commands, but not within either of their sequences.
*
Note a cubic spline is used to interpolate between points, and that
*
can cause over/under-shoot near an abrupt change. Combined with period=
*
this gives an excellent representation of sinewave/cosinewave.
*
*
Note that time dependence can currently only be specified via the
*
time command in an input file (i.e. not programmable method exists).
*
*
*
Example block input file:
*
* this is an example BLFieldMap input file, suitable for a solenoid
*
# grid interval is 1 cm.
*
# The region of validity is -390<=Z<=390 and 0<=R<=90
*
param normB=1.0 current=1.0
*
cylinder Z0=0.0 nR=10 nZ=40 dR=10.0 dZ=10.0
*
extendZ flip=Br
*
Bz
*
... 40 lines of 10 values, Z=0 thru Z=390
*
Br
*
... 40 lines of 10 values, Z=0 thru Z=390
*
--EOF--

*
*
Example pointwise input file:
*
* this is an example BLFieldMap input file, suitable for a solenoid
*
# grid interval is 1 cm.
*
# The region of validity is -390<=Z<=390 and 0<=R<=90
*
param normB=1.0 current=1.0
*
cylinder Z0=0.0 nR=10 nZ=40 dR=10.0 dZ=10.0
*
extendZ flip=Br
*
data
*
... 400 lines of 4 values, giving R,Z,Br,Bz
*
--EOF--

### 10.5 Window Files

Used by the absorber command.

*      The file format is a series of lines:
*              First character # means comment, * means printed comment.
*              Comment and blank lines are ignored. Units are mm.
*              The first line contains the 4 flange variables:
*                      innerR outerR insideZ outsideZ
*              The remaining lines contain 3 values for a given radius:
*                      r z t
*              The first line must have r=0.0 and have the largest z value
*              and the largest z+t value. z is the inside of the window,
*              z+t is the outside of the window. All values must be positive.
*              Successive r values must increase by at least 0.010 mm.
*              Successive z values and z+t values must decrease by at least
*              0.010 mm.
*              flangeInnerRadius should equal the last r value.
*              Any z origin may be used (it will be subtracted away).
*      This is intended to be easy to interface to window design
*      spreadsheets (export a list of 3 columns delimited by spaces, then
*      add the appropriate comments and flange values at the top).

### 10.6 Root Files

The standard Root file format is used. All G4beamline outputs are TNtuple-s combined into a single
Root file whose name is given by the parameter histoFile. The TNtuple fields are the same as for
BLTrackFile and the Trace file above.

11 Acknowledgments
The genesis of G4beamline was my desire to learn modern physics simulation codes, and Geant4 was by
far the best choice. Parts of G4beamline’s design were inspired by the Beam Tools developed at
Fermilab [6] by Daniel Elvira, Paul Lebrun, Panagiotis Spentzouris, and others, even though essentially
none of their code remains. The LISAPhysicsList came from the Geant4 collaboration, and the
MICEPhysicsList came from G4MICE developed by the MICE collaboration. The source files from
these external sources retain the original authors’ comments and disclaimers; they total less than 1% of
the G4beamline source code.

Geant4 [1] is a flexible and versatile toolkit for simulating the passage of particles through matter and
electromagnetic fields. This program literally would not have been possible without it. Thanks to the
entire Geant4 collaboration. This product includes software developed by Members of the Geant4
Collaboration (https://geant4.web.cern.ch/).

CLHEP [2] is a comprehensive class library for High Energy Physics, and G4beamline literally would
not have been possible without it. Thanks to all of the CLHEP editors and authors.

The HistoScope program [3] was a marvelous program for generating and manipulating histograms. It
had a fine graphical user interface and could do just about everything one might want to do with
histograms, X-Y plots, scatter plots, 2-d histograms, and NTuples. Much thanks to the authors: Mark
Edel, Konstantine Iourha, Joy Kyriakopulos, Paul Lebrun, Jeff Kallenbach, and Baolin Ren; thanks also
to Fermilab for making it available. Unfortunately, it is no longer supported. It was the inspiration for
HistoRoot (https://historoot.muonsinc.com). Note: HistoRoot is deprecated, replaced by AllPlot.

AllPlot (http://allplot.muonsinc.com) is a modern Python3 program for generating histograms and plots
from files in a variety of formats.

Root [5] is a programming environment intended for data analysis. It supports data files with a tree
structure, 1-D and 2-D histograms, X-Y plots, and NTuples. HistoRoot (https://historoot.muonsinc.com)
is a root program that provides a graphical user interface to the histogram capabilities of Root – it was
inspired by the capabilities of HistoScope, with a completely different user interface. Of course, the
native Root tools can be used as well. Thanks to all of the Root developers. Note: HistoRoot is
deprecated, replaced by AllPlot.

The Qt library [9] is licensed under the Lesser Gnu Public License. Combined with the OpenGL library
this implements by far the best visualization driver for simulated systems and events.

The X-windows graphics libraries and the basic gcc libraries and compiler are also released under the
GPL and/or LGPL. Thanks to the entire open-source community for making such a comprehensive
software development environment freely available.

Appendix 1 – README.txt
G4beamline 3.08
by Tom Roberts
Copyright (C) 2003-2022 by Tom Roberts, Muons, Inc.
All rights reserved.

http://g4beamline.muonsinc.com

LICENSE
-------

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License
as published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2
of the License, or (at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.

http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html

NOTE: This program uses several open-source libraries. Their license terms
can be found in the Acknowledgements section of G4beamlineUsersGuide.pdf
(in the doc directory of the distribution).

GENERAL
-------

The general reference for G4beamline is the User's Guide, located in the
doc directory named G4beamlineUsersGuide.pdf.

It is also available on the web: http://g4beamline.muonsinc.com

INSTALLATION
------------

There is a "Quick Start" section in the User's Guide.

INSTALLING THE REQUIRED GEANT4 DATA FILES
-----------------------------------------

G4beamline uses Geant4 to perform most of the physics. It inherently needs
data files to drive and control its many physics processes.

To install the data files, run the "g4bldata" program (in the bin directory
under the install directory). It is a GUI program that lets you select which

datasets to download (depends on which physics lists you intend to use).
Note that by default it puts these data files into $HOME/Geant4Data (on
Windows C:\Geant4Data). The other programs look for it there, and if it is
not found they will run g4bldata for you. Alternatively, you can put a file
".data" into the top-level install directory, containing the full path to the
directory containing the Geant4 data files.

INITIAL TESTING
---------------

NOTE: Root requires the C++ compiler be installed during execution (not just
build). If you don't use format=root NTuples, you do not need to install the
C++ compiler.

GUI: run the g4blgui program. Click the menu item Tools/DoRegressionTests.

Command-Line: run the g4bltest program (in the bin directory under the install
directory).

Both of these run 113 regression tests. They should all pass, though often
some are omitted (depends on configuration).

RUNNING THE PROGRAM -- GUI
--------------------------

Simply double-click the G4beamline icon. On Windows it is placed on your
desktop
and in the Start/G4beamline menu. On Mac OS X it is placed where you dragged
(copied) it when you installed it. On Linux the bin/g4bl-icon script will
create
one on your desktop.

To run the GUI program via the command line:

source G4beamline-VERSION/bin/g4bl-setup.sh

# optionally cd where your input file is located

g4blgui  [input.file]
This requires the X-Windows display on Linux, nothing special on Mac and
Windows. Its opening screen decribes how to use it and gives help on all
G4beamline commands..

To run the examples, simply push the Browse button, or the File/Open menu item,
navigate to the install directory / examples, and select Example1.g4bl (or
other *.g4bl file).  Then select the desired viewer (if any), and push the
Run button.  On Windows, a copy of "G4beamline Examples" is put into
"Documents".

RUNNING THE PROGRAM -- COMMAND-LINE
-----------------------------------

For command-line use (Linux, Mac OS X, and Windows with Cygwin), you must
add G4beamline's bin directory to your PATH:

source G4beamline-VERSION/bin/g4bl-setup.sh
You can put this into $HOME/.bash_profile. There is also g4bl-setup.csh.

Then cd to whatever directory you plan to use for developing your
simulation(s), and execute:

g4bl -

After a few seconds it should type (with obvious variations):
G4BL_DIR=/Users/g4bl/G4beamline-3.08.app/Contents
LD_LIBRARY_PATH='/Users/g4bl/G4beamline-3.08.app/Contents/lib:'
G4ABLADATA=/Users/tjrob/Geant4Data/G4ABLA3.1
G4LEDATA=/Users/tjrob/Geant4Data/G4EMLOW8.0
G4ENSDFSTATEDATA=/Users/tjrob/Geant4Data/G4ENSDFSTATE2.3
G4INCLDATA=/Users/tjrob/Geant4Data/G4INCL1.0
G4NEUTRONHPDATA=/Users/tjrob/Geant4Data/G4NDL4.6
G4PARTICLEXSDATA=/Users/tjrob/Geant4Data/G4PARTICLEXS4.0
G4PIIDATA=/Users/tjrob/Geant4Data/G4PII1.3
G4LEVELGAMMADATA=/Users/tjrob/Geant4Data/PhotonEvaporation5.7
G4RADIOACTIVEDATA=/Users/tjrob/Geant4Data/RadioactiveDecay5.6
G4REALSURFACEDATA=/Users/tjrob/Geant4Data/RealSurface2.2
G4SAIDXSDATA=/Users/tjrob/Geant4Data/G4SAIDDATA2.0
G4TENDLDATA=/Users/tjrob/Geant4Data/G4TENDL1.4
G4LENDDATA=/Users/tjrob/Geant4Data/LEND_GND1.3_ENDF.BVII.1
G4beamline Process ID 5737

*************************************************************
g4beamline version: 3.08                        (Aug  9 2022)
Copyright : Tom Roberts, Muons, Inc.
License : Gnu Public License
WWW : http://g4beamline.muonsinc.com

################################
!!! G4Backtrace is activated !!!
################################

**************************************************************
Geant4 version Name: geant4-11-00-patch-02 [MT]   (25-May-2022)
Copyright : Geant4 Collaboration
References : NIM A 506 (2003), 250-303
: IEEE-TNS 53 (2006), 270-278
: NIM A 835 (2016), 186-225
WWW : http://geant4.org/
**************************************************************

geometry                   nPoints=100 printGeometry=0 visual=0
tolerance=0.002
cmd:

The program is now ready for input. Type "help" to get a short list of
the input-file commands, "help beam" to get help on the beam comand, or
"help *" for a detailed description of all commands. This is a useful way
to get help on commands when editing your input file(s). Type ^C to exit

back to a shell prompt.

EXAMPLE 1
---------

The first example input file is Example1.g4bl. It is a simple file to track
muons through 1-meter drift spaces into 4 detectors. To visualize its
geometry using the Qt viewer, execute:

cd G4beamline-VERSION/examples

g4bl Example1.g4bl viewer=best

To run the beam through the geometry, execute:

g4bl Example1.g4bl
This will generate a Root file named g4beamline.root. To view it do:

allplot g4beamline.root

OTHER EXAMPLES
--------------

There are other examples in the examples directory.

Appendix 2 – BUILD.txt

G4beamline 3.08

Copyright 2002-2022 by Tom Roberts, Muons, Inc.

All Rights reserved.

GENERAL
-------

The builds on Mac and Linux are 64-bit and use static libraries for Geant4,
dynamic libraries for all others.
This release does not include a Windows build.

NOTE: Coin3D has been removed, in favor of OGLSQt. The Qt viewer has
essentially
all of the features of Coin3D, plus some new ones. In particular you can still
use the mouse to rotate, pan, and zoom the viewer.

The G4beamline build uses CMake, and has these ON/OFF options:

G4BL_FFTW
use FFTW (for spacecharge command)

uses FFTW_DIR

G4BL_GSL
use GSL (for several commands, including coil)

uses GSL_DIR

G4BL_GUI
build the GUI programs (g4blgui, g4bldata); uses Qt

needs Qt 5.X

G4BL_MPI
enable MPI (default=OFF)

needs MPI.cmake

G4BL_ROOT
use Root (for NTuples)

uses ROOT_DIR (= ROOTSYS)

G4BL_VISUAL enable visualization (with OGLSQt) - needs G4BL_GUI

needs Qt 5.X
They all default to ON except G4BL_MPI.

You must also specify the directory for each of the libraries (except MPI) --
if you set G4BL_MPI=ON you must edit MPI.cmake for the specific MPI
configuration of the machine on which you are building.
if G4BL_GUI=OFF and G4BL_VISUAL=OFF, you don't need the Qt libraries (e.g. for
a supercomputer); you must download the Geant4 data sets manually (no
g4bldata).

The following libraries are used:

Geant4 - http://geant4.cern.ch

CLHEP - internal to Geant4

Qt - http://www.qt.io/download/   (g4blgui and g4bldata only)

Root - http://root.cern.ch

Gnu Scientific Library (gsl) - http://www.gnu.org/software/gsl/

FFTW - http://www.fftw.org/
The details and versions vary on the different platforms, so see below for
details.

First you need to select a place to build. I use $HOME/G4beamline-VERSION,
which is used below.

Note that Geant4 uses its internal version of CLHEP, expat, and zlib.

Building Libraries:
The basic idea is that each library gets a directory in $HOME that is
NAME-VERSION. In most cases when building from source, I create a
"build" directory under $HOME/NAME-VERSION, build there, and install to
$HOME/NAME-VERSION. If the source already has a "build" directory, I
use "build-tjr".

As G4beamline is hosted on a Mac, it is presumed that a new release will be
built first on Mac OS X. So the CMake files for Darwin construct some "source"
files used by other OSs: Help.html. It also generates
G4beamline-VERSION-source.tgz

The G4beamline source is hosted on tjrob.dhcp.fnal.gov in user "g4bl". This
is a high-end Mac Pro with 8 dual-thread cores, 16 GB ram, 0.5 TB SSD, and
6 TB Scratch. It has quintuple geographically diverse back-ups, one of which
is in the cloud (Dropbox.com) and is updated after every modification to any
file.

Top-Level directories in $HOME:
G4beamline-VERSION
build dir
G4beamline-source
source dir - symbolic link to

~tjrob/Dropbox/G4beamline-source
G4beamlineDistributions dir contining distributions (incl old ones)
Geant4Data

dir containing downloaded Geant4 Datasets
geant4.VERSION

build dir
root-VERSION
Download & build dir
(On my Mac: Qt, fftw, and gsl are installed in /usr/local by HomeBrew.)

G4beamline-source top-level files:
CMakeLists.txt

the CMake file for the entire project
MPI.cmake

CMake file for MPI configuration

G4beamline-source top-level directories:
Resources

general resource files
bin

scripts: g4bl-setup.sh, g4bl-setup.csh
doc

documentation
examples

examples
finalize

dir used only for installation sequencing
g4bl

the g4bl executable
g4bldata

the g4bldata executable
g4blgui

the g4blgui executable
g4blmpi

the g4blmpi executable
g4bltest

the g4bltest executable
scripts

scripts for building
share

shared files
test

tests
validation

g4bl input files used in validation

Note that G4BLVERSION is defined in the top-level CMakeLists.txt.
Some scripts use grep & sed to obtain it, so don't change the syntax.

Note that after building the libraries, building G4beamline is quite short.

Doxygen
-------
If you are building G4beamline to add new code, you'll find the Doxygen
documentation invaluable:

install doxygen

cd G4beamline-3.08-source/doc

doxygen

open in your browser: G4beamline-3.08-source/doc/html/index.html

Updating the Documentation
--------------------------

This is on Mac OS X, using MS Word for Mac 2019 and some shell commands in
a Terminal window.

G4beamline-source/doc:
BUILD.txt

instructions for building G4beamline
Doxyfile

doxygen control file
G4beamlinePresentation.pdf
an old presentation on G4beamline
G4beamlineUsersGuide.pdf The G4beamline users Guide
G4beamlineValidation.pdf The G4beamline Validation document
History.txt

Inverse-chronological update history
README.txt

README file (for binary installations)
footer

the footer for doxygen pages
mainpage.md

the main page for doxygen pages

The sources for the .pdf-s are in ~tjrob/Documents/G4beamline, printed to PDF
here. The other files are edited in place.

Updating G4beamlineUsersGuide.pdf:

open G4beamlineUsersGuide.doc in Word for Mac

update any text that need updating, including the title page

Delete the help text in section 4.8 (G4beamline commands by type)

In a tmp directory do:

echo 'help' | g4bl - >index.txt

edit index.txt and delete extraneous lines at top and bottom

in Word, insert index.txt using the default encoding

(uses Courier 10.5 font, which is OK)

Delete the help text in section 5 (G4beamline commands (alphabetical))

In a tmp directory do:

echo 'help *' | g4bl - >help.txt

edit help.txt and delede extraneous lines at top and bottom

in Word, insert help.txt using the default encoding

(uses Courier 10.5 font, which is OK)

in Word, apply the style "Heading 2" to every command line (so they

appear in the table of contents).

update any appendices that need it.

Print the file to PDF into the doc directory.

Build - Mac OS X (Darwin)
-------------------------

This is on Mac OS X Catalina (10.15.7), native on my Mac Pro.
The build is 64-bit. This uses the bash shell in a Terminal window.
Geant4 is statically linked, the rest are dynamically linked.

HomeBrew is used to install several libraries.

NOTE: OpenMotif and XQuartz don't play nice together. This as a primary reason
to replace Coin3D with the Qt viewer (Coin3D needs OpenMotif).

Qt

brew install qt5

export PATH=/usr/local/opt/qt5/bin:$PATH

# Note brew also installed qt4 and it is still used by other programs.

# as long as the correct qmake is in your PATH, cmake will find it.

GSL

brew install gsl

export GSL_DIR=/usr/local

FFTW

brew install fftw

export FFTW_DIR=/usr/local

Root

Download root_v6.26.06.macos-10.15-x86_64-clang120.tar.gz and

untar it in $HOME

mv root root_v6.26.06

export ROOTSYS=$HOME/root_v6.26.06

Geant4

Download geant4-v11.0.2.tar.gz and untar it in $HOME

cd geant4-v11.0.2

mkdir build; cd build

cmake -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=$HOME/geant4-v11.0.2 -DGEANT4_USE_QT=ON -
DBUILD_SHARED_LIBS=OFF -DBUILD_STATIC_LIBS=ON ..

cmake --build . --config Release --target install # ignore warnings

# now ../bin, ../lib, and ../include contain the library files

# (static only)

export GEANT4_DIR=$HOME/geant4-v11.0.2

G4beamline

# be sure the above environment variables for the libraries are set

cd

mkdir G4beamline-3.08

cd G4beamline-3.08

cmake ../G4beamline-source

# CMakeLists.txt forces the install prefix to be $PWD

cmake --build . --config Release --target install # ignore warnings

Now you should have these products in G4beamline-3.08 (plus a bunch of
build files and directories):

G4beamline-3.08-source.tgz

G4beamline-3.08.app/

G4beamline-3.08.dmg
You can run G4beamline from the .app right there, or you can mount the .dmg
and drag the .app into /Applications.
NOTE: if you run g4blgui directly from the bin directory, its menus may be dead
-- this is a "feature" of the Mac; run it via the app and all is well.

NOTE: If you get lots of errors related to std::enable_if_t and
std::i_arithmetic_v, you probably have Qt6 installed, and it confuses Qt5.
Move Qt6 to a temporary directory (or delete/uninstall it) and G4beamline
should build.

For MPI:
1. use HomeBrew to install open-mpi (brew install open-mpi).
2. Edit MPI.cmake to handle your system, probably by copying the
code for tjrob and editing it appropriately.
3. add "-DG4BL_MPI=YES" to your cmake command line; you may
want to set "-DG4BL_VISUAL=NO"; on macOS you must keep "-DG4BL_GUI=YES"
(the default)
4. do the cmake
5. cmake --build . --config Release --target install
6. Note that no .app or distribution is built for an MPI build
To run it, use g4blmpi in the bin directory of the folder in which you built
G4beamline. For example, to use 15 ranks:

$HOME/G4beamline-3.08-MPI/bin/g4blmpi 15 input.file [params...]

Build - Linux CentOS 8 Stream
-----------------------------

This is on the VMware virtual machine "CentOS 8 Stream 64-bit Build", on
tjrob@tjrob.dhcp.fnal.gov. The following shared folders are mounted:

MAC

Ubuntu

---

------

/Users/tjrob
$HOME/tjrobOnMyMac

/Users/g4bl $HOME/g4blOnMyMac
Note that Mac symbolic links are not followed, so for G4beamline source
use $HOME/tjrobOnMyMac/Dropbox/G4beamline-source

The build is 64-bit. This uses the bash shell in a Terminal window.
All libraries but Root and Qt are statically linked.

install cmake:

sudo yum install cmake

sudo yum install make # not installed by default, even though g++ is

Now build the libraries and G4beamline.

Qt

sudo yum install qt5-qtbase-devel.x86_64

export PATH=/usr/lib64/qt5/bin:$PATH

GSL

sudo yum install gsl-devel

export GSL_DIR=/usr

FFTW

sudo yum install fftw-devel

export FFTW_DIR=/usr

Root

#Download root_v6.26.06.Linux-centos8-x86_64-gcc8.5.tar.gz from

#    https://root.cern.ch and untar it in $HOME

mv root root_v6.26.06

export ROOTSYS=$HOME/root_v6.26.06

sudo yum install openssl-devel

Geant4

# Download geant4-v11.0.2.tar.gz from https://geant4.cern.ch

and untar it in $HOME

mkdir geant4-v11.0.2

cd geant4-v11.0.2

mkdir build

cd build

cmake -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=$HOME/geant4-v11.0.2 -DGEANT4_USE_QT=ON -
DBUILD_SHARED_LIBS=OFF -DBUILD_STATIC_LIBS=ON

cmake --build . --config Release --target install # ignore warnings

# now ../bin, ../lib64, and ../include contain the library files

# (static only)

export GEANT4_DIR=$HOME/geant4-v11.0.2

G4beamline

cd

# be sure the above environment variables for the libraries are set

# $HOME/g4blOnMyMac is a symbolic link to /mnt/hgfs/g4bl/ which is

# /Users/g4bl on the Mac. Ditto for tjrob.

mkdir G4beamline-3.08

cd G4beamline-3.08

# CMakeLists.txt forces the install prefix to be $PWD (CMAKE_BINARY_DIR)

cmake ../tjrobOnMyMac/Dropbox/G4beamline-source

cmake --build . --config Release --target install # ignore warnings

Now you should have these products in G4beamline-3.08 (plus a bunch of
build files and directories):

bin, lib, ...

G4beamline-3.08-CentOS64.tgz
You can run G4beamline from bin right there, or you can un-tar the .tgz
and run from its bin directory.

Build - Linux Ubuntu 22.04
--------------------------

This is on the VMware virtual machine "Ubuntu 64-bit 22.04 Build", on
tjrob (my Mac Pro). The following shared folders are mounted:

MAC

Ubuntu

---

------

/Users/tjrob
$HOME/tjrobOnMyMac

/Users/g4bl $HOME/g4blOnMyMac
Note that Mac symbolic links are not followed, so for G4beamline source
use $HOME/tjrobOnMyMac/Dropbox/G4beamline-source

The build is 64-bit. This uses the bash shell in an XTerm window.

Qt

# package qt5-default no longer exists

sudo apt-get install qtbase5-dev qtchooser qt5-qmake qtbase5-dev-tools

# make sure /usr/bin/qmake is qt5

GSL

sudo apt-get install libgsl-dev

export GSL_DIR=/usr

FFTW

sudo apt-get install fftw3-dev

export FFTW_DIR=/usr

Root

# Download root_v6.26.06.Linux-ubuntu22-x86_64-gcc11.2.tar.gz

#     from root.cern.ch

# untar it in $HOME, verify that it runs

mv root root_v6.26.06

export ROOTSYS=$HOME/root_v6.26.06

# now root_v6.26.06/bin, lib, and include contain the library files

# (dynamic only)

Geant4

# Download geant4-v11.0.2.tar.gz from geant4.cern.ch

# untar it in $HOME

# (no TJR edits needed)

cd geant4-v11.0.2

mkdir build

cd build

cmake -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=$HOME/geant4.v11.0.2 -DBUILD_SHARED_LIBS=OFF
-DBUILD_STATIC_LIBS=ON -DGEANT4_USE_SYSTEM_EXPAT=OFF -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release
-DGEANT4_USE_RAYTRACER_X11=ON -DGEANT4_USE_OPENGL_X11=ON -DGEANT4_USE_QT=ON  ..

cmake --build . --config Release --target install # ignore warnings

export GEANT4_DIR=$HOME/geant4-v11.0.2

# now ../bin, ../lib, and ../include contain the library files

# (static only)

G4beamline

# be sure the above environment variables for the libraries are set

mkdir G4beamline-3.08

cd G4beamline-3.08

cmake ../tjrobOnMyMac/Dropbox/G4beamline-source

# CMakeLists.txt forces the install prefix to be $PWD (CMAKE_BINARY_DIR)

cmake --build . --config Release --target install # ignore warnings

Now you should have these products in G4beamline-3.08 (plus a bunch of
build files and directories):

bin, lib, ...

G4beamline-3.08-Ubuntu64.tgz
You can run G4beamline from bin right there, or you can un-tar the .tgz
and run from its bin directory.

------------------------------------------------------------
From here on these instructions are old and not part of 3.08
------------------------------------------------------------

Build - Windows 10 - 64 bit
---------------------------

This is on the VMware Virtual machine "Windows 10 x64 Build".
Be sure to do Windows Update repeatedly until no more.

This will be a 64-bit build.

Download and install Visual Studio 2019 Community edition, including command-
line tools.

Use the link in the start menu "X64 native tools command prompt for VS 2019".
Keep setup.bat up-to-date and run it EVERY TIME.

Download and install cmake 3.21.2 (uninstall any previous version first).
Have it put itself into the system path for all users.

Qt

Download Qt 5.12.11 offline installer (online install takes forever)

/official_releases/qt/5.12/5.12.11/qt-opensource-windows-x86-5.12.11.exe

Install Qt 5.12.11 for MS VC 2017 64-bit and 32-bit.

setup.bat: @call C:\Qt\Qt5.12.11\5.12.11\msvc2017_64\bin\qtenv2.bat

Geant4

#download geant4.10.07.p02 source, unpack into %HOMEPATH%

# In the above cmd window:

cd %HOMEPATH%

cd geant4.10.07.p02

mkdir build

cd build

cmake -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX="%HOMEPATH%\geant4.10.07.p02" \

-DGEANT4_USE_QT=ON -DGEANT4_USE_OPENGL_WIN32=ON \

-DGEANT4_BUILD_MUONIC_ATOMS_IN_USE=ON \

-DGEANT4_BUILD_MSVC_MP=ON ..

cmake --build . --config Release --target install

(Took 44 minutes on a 4-core VM)

setup.bat: set GEANT4_DIR=C:\Users\tjrob\geant4.10.07.p02

Root

There is no 64-bit root for Windows.

fftw

Download https://fftw.org/pub/fftw/fftw-3.3.5-dll64.zip and extract

all files into %HOMEPATH% (creates fftw-3.3.5-dll64)

Read its README and create subdirectories bin, lib, include;

move fftw3.h into include

move *.def into lib

move *.dll into bin

cd lib and run the 'lib' tool 3 times (see README)

setup.bat: set FFTW_DIR=C:\Users\tjrob\fftw-3.3.5-dll64

gsl

(32-bit GSL pacakages are availble, but not 64-bit, and the gnu

build scripts are UNIX only; so use vcpkg)

install git, bootstrap and install vcpkg (see
https://solarianprogrammer.com/2020/01/26/getting-started-gsl-gnu-scientificlibrary-windows-macos-linux/ )

cd C:/DEV/vcpkg

.\vcpkg install gsl gsl:x64-windows

setup.bat: set GSL_DIR=C:\DEV\vcpkg\packages\gsl_x64-windows

G4beamline:
cd %HOMEPATH%
Make sure setup.bat is up to date and has been run.
mkdir G4beamline-3.08
cd G4beamline-3.08
cmake -DG4BL_ROOT=NO Z:\tjrob\Dropbox\G4beamline-source
cmake --build . --config Release --target install

Here is setup.bat:
@rem    setup.bat - setup G4beamline build environment
@rem    Must be called from "x64 Native Tools Command Prompt"
@rem         (In Start Menu under "Visual Studio 2019".)

@echo.
@echo setup for a 64-bit build
@echo.

@call C:\Qt\Qt5.12.11\5.12.11\msvc2017_64\bin\qtenv2.bat
@echo Note that vcvarsall.bat was already called before this window opened

set GEANT4_DIR=C:\Users\tjrob\geant4.10.07.p02
set GSL_DIR=C:\DEV\vcpkg\packages\gsl_x64-windows
set FFTW_DIR=C:\Users\tjrob\fftw-3.3.5-dll64

@echo.
@echo Root is not available.

set PATH=%GSL_DIR%\bin;%PATH%

cd C:\Users\tjrob

Build - Windows -- OLD 32-bit OLD OLD OLD
---------------

NEW VERSION for Geant4 10.07.p02 - uses cmd window (not Visual Studio GUI).

This is on the VMware Virtual machine "Windows 10 x64 Build".
Be sure to do Windows Update.

Download and install Visual Studio 2017 Community edition, including command-
line tools.

Qt: download Qt 5.12.0 for both 32-bit MSVC2017 and 64-bit. We'll use 32-bit
(for Root).  Installed in C:\Qt\5.12.0
*** Update hard-coded path for QT_BIN_DIR in G4beamline-source/CMakeLists.txt.

In start menu, use "Visual Studio/x86 Native Tools Command Prompt for VS2017",
and then:

call C:\Qt\5.12.0\msvc2017\bin\qtenv2.bat
-- that sets up the 32-bit MS VC++ tools, with 32-bit Qt. Do NOT use any
64-bit tools or libs.

Better: use "Visual Studio/x86 Native Tools Command Prompt for VS2017",
and then:

call setup.bat
-- that sets up Qt and also sets the environment variables for the libraries.

Already Installed:

CMake 3.8.0

Qt 5.12.0; its qmake is in PATH

$HOME/fftw-3.3.5-32

$HOME/gsl-2.3-32

$HOME/root_v6.15.06.win32.vc15

C:/Program Files (x06)/GnuWin32/bin/bsdtar

Geant4:

#download geant4_10_05 source, unpack into geant4_10_05-source

# In the above cmd window:

cd %HOMEPATH%

mkdir geant4_10_05

cd geant4_10_05

cmake -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX="%HOMEPATH%\geant4_10_05" \

-DGEANT4_USE_QT=ON -DGEANT4_USE_OPENGL_WIN32=ON \

-DGEANT4_BUILD_MUONIC_ATOMS_IN_USE=ON -DGEANT4_BUILD_MSVC_MP=ON \

"%HOMEPATH%\geant4_10_05-source"

cmake --build . --config Release --target install

--- took 24 minutes on a 4-CPU virtual machine.

G4beamline:

cd %HOMEPATH%

Make sure these are set (e.g. by setup.bat):

set GEANT4_DIR=/Users/tjrob/geant4_10_05

set FFTW_DIR=/Users/tjrob/fftw-3.3.5-32

set GSL_DIR=/Users/tjrob/gsl-2.3-32

set ROOTSYS=/Users/tjrob/root_v6.15.06.win32.vc15

mkdir G4beamline-3.06

cd G4beamline-3.06

cmake Z:\g4bl\G4beamline-source

cmake --build . --config Release --target install

Build - cori.nersc.gov
------------------------

NOTE: I gave up on trying to use Root on Cori. With a later version
of Root it might be possible, as there is now a flag to omit X-Windows (which
worker nodes don't have and cannot use).

I work in /project/projectdirs/m3248/troberts

source setupToBuild # which does:

source compiler gnu

module load gsl

echo gsl loaded

module load fftw

echo fftw loaded

Geant4:

#download and un-tar geant5.10.07.p02.tar.gz

mv geant4.10.07.p02 geant4.10.07.p02-source

mkdir geant4.10.07.p02-cori

cd $_

cmake -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=$PWD -DBUILD_SHARED_LIBS=OFF -
DBUILD_STATIC_LIBS=ON -DGEANT4_USE_SYSTEM_EXPAT=OFF -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release
-DGEANT4_USE_RAYTRACER_X11=OFF -DGEANT4_USE_QT=OFF ../geant4.10.07.p02-source

cmake --build . --config Release --target install # ignore warnings

export GEANT4_DIR=$PWD

ln -s lib64 lib # otherwise cmake cannot find Geant4 package

cd ..

Root:

doesn't link (uses different .so-s)

fftw:

# Note the FFTW module uses different filenames

# download and unpack fftw-3.3.4-source.tgz

cd fftw-3.3.4

./configure --prefix=$PWD

make install

export FFTW_DIR=$PWD

cd ..

G4Beamline:

# download G4beamline-3.06-source and untar it

# make sure GEANT4_DIR is set properly

export FFTW_DIR=$FFTW_DIR/.. # module load gives the lib directory

# (but gsl gave the correct directory)

mkdir G4beamline-3.06-cori

cd $_

cmake -DG4BL_VISUAL=OFF -DG4BL_GUI=OFF -DG4BL_MPI=ON -
DG4BL_ROOT=OFF ../G4beamline-3.06-source

cmake --build . --config Release --target install # ignore warnings

Appendix 3 – Output from Example1.g4bl
Note that Geant4 outputs considerable detail to stdout. Annotations below are headings inserted into the
output text.

While starting G4beamline, the Root libraries output a benign error message – IGNORE IT:
Error: cannot open file "iostream"  (tmpfile):2:
*** Interpreter error recovered ***

First, the g4bl script outputs environment variables:
G4BL_DIR=/Users/g4bl/G4beamline-2.11
G4ABLADATA=/Users/g4bl/G4beamline-2.11/Geant4Data/G4ABLA3.0
G4LEDATA=/Users/g4bl/G4beamline-2.11/Geant4Data/G4EMLOW6.23
G4NEUTRONHPDATA=/Users/g4bl/G4beamline-2.11/Geant4Data/G4NDL4.0
G4NEUTRONXSDATA=/Users/g4bl/G4beamline-2.11/Geant4Data/G4NEUTRONXS1.1
G4PIIDATA=/Users/g4bl/G4beamline-2.11/Geant4Data/G4PII1.3
G4LEVELGAMMADATA=/Users/g4bl/G4beamline-2.11/Geant4Data/PhotonEvaporation2.2
G4RADIOACTIVEDATA=/Users/g4bl/G4beamline-2.11/Geant4Data/RadioactiveDecay3.4
G4REALSURFACEDATA=/Users/g4bl/G4beamline-2.11/Geant4Data/RealSurface1.0
DYLD_LIBRARY_PATH=/Users/g4bl/G4beamline-2.11/lib:
G4beamline Process ID 30447

G4beamline outputs its identification:
*************************************************************
g4beamline version: 2.11                    (19-Apr-2012-17:00)
Copyright : Tom Roberts, Muons, Inc.
License : Gnu Public License
WWW : http://g4beamline.muonsinc.com
*************************************************************
Geant4 version Name: geant4-09-05-patch-01    (20-March-2012)
Copyright : Geant4 Collaboration
Reference : NIM A 506 (2003), 250-303
WWW : http://cern.ch/geant4
*************************************************************
geometry                   nPoints=100 printGeometry=0 visual=0
tolerance=0.002
Here are some lines beginning with ‘*’ from the input file:
*
Example1.g4bl - simple first example
*
* Simple example g4beamline input file:
*
a 200 MeV mu+ Gaussian beam is tracked through 1-meter drift
*
spaces into four detectors
Some output from the physics command comes before the command itself:
G4PhysListFactory::GetReferencePhysList <QGSP_BERT>  EMoption= 0
<<< Geant4 Physics List simulation engine: QGSP_BERT 3.4

<<< Reference Physics List QGSP_BERT is built

physics      QGSP_BERT     disable= inactivate= deactivate= doStochastics=1
minRangeCut=1 list=0 gammaToMuPair=0 spinTracking=0
synchrotronRadiation=0 synchrotronRadiationMuon=0

Next is the beam command:
beam    GAUSSIAN particle=mu+ nEvents=1000 firstEvent=-1 lastEvent=2147483647
beamX=0.0 beamY=0.0 beamZ=0.0 maxR=1000000.0

meanMomentum=200.0 weight=1.000000

sigmaX=10.0 sigmaY=10.0 sigmaZ=0.0 sigmaXp=0.10000 sigmaYp=0.10000

sigmaP=4.0 sigmaT=0.000 meanXp=0.00000 meanYp=0.00000 meanT=0.000
The rest of the commands from the input file:
reference                  particle=mu+ beamX=0 beamY=0 beamZ=0 beamT=0
rotation= referenceMomentum=200 beamXp=0 beamYp=0
meanMomentum=200 meanXp=0 meanYp=0 tuneZ=-3.7e+21
tuneMomentum=-3.7e+21 tolerance=0.001 noEfield=0
noEloss=0
box          BeamVis       height=100 width=100 length=0.1 maxStep=100
material=Vacuum color=1,0,0 kill=0
place   BeamVis copies=1 x=0.0 y=0.0 z=0.0
virtualdetector Det        radius=1000 innerRadius=0 height=2000 width=2000
length=1 maxStep=100 material= color=0,1,0
noSingles=0 format= filename= file= require=
referenceParticle=0 coordinates=Centerline kill=0
place   Det     copies=1 x=0.0 y=0.0 z=1000.0 rename='Det#'
place   Det     copies=1 x=0.0 y=0.0 z=2000.0 rename='Det#'
place   Det     copies=1 x=0.0 y=0.0 z=3000.0 rename='Det#'
place   Det     copies=1 x=0.0 y=0.0 z=4000.0 rename='Det#'

The World size is printed:
World size (before incrementing by 201.357 mm): 2000.0 H  2000.0 W  8001.0 L

The final values of the parameters are printed:
PARAMETERS:
Zcl=4000.5
deltaChord=3.0
deltaIntersection=0.1
deltaOneStep=0.01
epsMax=0.05
epsMin=2.5e-7
eventTimeLimit=30
histoFile=g4beamline
histoUpdate=0
maxStep=100.0
minStep=0.01
steppingFormat=N GLOBAL CL KE STEP VOL PROCESS
steppingVerbose=0
viewer=none
worldMaterial=Vacuum
zTolerance=2.0
Now a line for the construction of each Element is printed:
BLCMDbox::Construct BeamVis parent= relZ=0.0 globZ=0.0

zmin=-0.1 zmax=0.1
BLCMDvirtualdetector::Construct Det1 parent= relZ=1000.0 globZ=1000.0
BLCMDvirtualdetector::Construct Det2 parent= relZ=2000.0 globZ=2000.0
BLCMDvirtualdetector::Construct Det3 parent= relZ=3000.0 globZ=3000.0
BLCMDvirtualdetector::Construct Det4 parent= relZ=4000.0 globZ=4000.0
A comment from the Geant4 Physics List:

### Adding tracking cuts for neutron  TimeCut(ns)= 10000  KinEnergyCut(MeV)= 0

The Geometry test results:
Geometry test nPoints=100 tolerance=0.002 mm:
Testing geometry for children of group 'World':
Total geometry errors = 0  0 seconds

Now the Tune Particle is prepared and simulated (nothing to tune in this simulation):
================= Prepare Tune Particle(s) ===========
*** NOTE: All stochastic processes are disabled!
================= Begin Tune Particle(s) =============
Run complete  1 Events  0 seconds
The Reference Particle is tracked:
================== Begin Reference Particle(s) ===============
Run complete  1 Events  0 seconds
Stochastic processes are enabled after the reference particle:
Stochastic processes are enabled.
Preparation to track the beam:
================== Prepare Tracking Beam ==================
Stochastic processes are enabled.
And the beam is tracked (timing summaries are spaced out to avoid too much output):
================== Begin Tracking Beam ===============
Event 1 Completed  1 events  realTime=1 sec  1.0 ev/sec
Event 2 Completed  2 events  realTime=1 sec  2.0 ev/sec
Event 3 Completed  3 events  realTime=1 sec  3.0 ev/sec
Event 4 Completed  4 events  realTime=1 sec  4.0 ev/sec
Event 5 Completed  5 events  realTime=1 sec  5.0 ev/sec
Event 6 Completed  6 events  realTime=1 sec  6.0 ev/sec
Event 7 Completed  7 events  realTime=1 sec  7.0 ev/sec
Event 8 Completed  8 events  realTime=1 sec  8.0 ev/sec
Event 9 Completed  9 events  realTime=1 sec  9.0 ev/sec
Event 10 Completed  10 events  realTime=1 sec  10.0 ev/sec
Event 20 Completed  20 events  realTime=1 sec  20.0 ev/sec
Event 30 Completed  30 events  realTime=1 sec  30.0 ev/sec
Event 40 Completed  40 events  realTime=1 sec  40.0 ev/sec
Event 50 Completed  50 events  realTime=1 sec  50.0 ev/sec
Event 60 Completed  60 events  realTime=1 sec  60.0 ev/sec
Event 70 Completed  70 events  realTime=1 sec  70.0 ev/sec
Event 80 Completed  80 events  realTime=1 sec  80.0 ev/sec
Event 90 Completed  90 events  realTime=1 sec  90.0 ev/sec
Event 100 Completed  100 events  realTime=1 sec  100.0 ev/sec
Event 200 Completed  200 events  realTime=1 sec  200.0 ev/sec
Event 300 Completed  300 events  realTime=1 sec  300.0 ev/sec
Event 400 Completed  400 events  realTime=1 sec  400.0 ev/sec
Event 500 Completed  500 events  realTime=1 sec  500.0 ev/sec
Event 600 Completed  600 events  realTime=1 sec  600.0 ev/sec
Event 700 Completed  700 events  realTime=1 sec  700.0 ev/sec
Event 800 Completed  800 events  realTime=1 sec  800.0 ev/sec
Event 900 Completed  900 events  realTime=1 sec  900.0 ev/sec
Event 1000 Completed  1000 events  realTime=1 sec  1000.0 ev/sec
Finally the run is finished; a summary of NTuples is printed:

Run complete  1000 Events  1 seconds
NTuple Det1                1002 entries
NTuple Det2                1003 entries
NTuple Det3                 999 entries
NTuple Det4                 953 entries
NTuple wrote Root File 'g4beamline.root'

A summary of all Exceptions is printed (a list of how many of each type is also printed):
Exceptions: 0 Fatal, 0 Events Aborted, 0 Stuck Tracks (stopped), 0 Warnings
The simulation is over:
g4beamline: simulation complete -- exiting

Appendix 4 – Geant4 Particle IDs
B+ PDGid=521
B- PDGid=-521
B0 PDGid=511
Bs0 PDGid=531
D+ PDGid=411
D- PDGid=-411
D0 PDGid=421
Ds+ PDGid=431
Ds- PDGid=-431
GenericIon PDGid=0
He3 PDGid=1000020030
J/psi PDGid=443
N(1440)+ PDGid=12212
N(1440)0 PDGid=12112
N(1520)+ PDGid=2124
N(1520)0 PDGid=1214
N(1535)+ PDGid=22212
N(1535)0 PDGid=22112
N(1650)+ PDGid=32212
N(1650)0 PDGid=32112
N(1675)+ PDGid=2216
N(1675)0 PDGid=2116
N(1680)+ PDGid=12216
N(1680)0 PDGid=12116
N(1700)+ PDGid=22124
N(1700)0 PDGid=21214
N(1710)+ PDGid=42212
N(1710)0 PDGid=42112
N(1720)+ PDGid=32124
N(1720)0 PDGid=31214
N(1900)+ PDGid=42124
N(1900)0 PDGid=41214
N(1990)+ PDGid=12218
N(1990)0 PDGid=12118
N(2090)+ PDGid=52214
N(2090)0 PDGid=52114
N(2190)+ PDGid=2128
N(2190)0 PDGid=1218
N(2220)+ PDGid=100002210
N(2220)0 PDGid=100002110
N(2250)+ PDGid=100012210
N(2250)0 PDGid=100012110
a0(1450)+ PDGid=10211
a0(1450)- PDGid=-10211
a0(1450)0 PDGid=10111
a0(980)+ PDGid=9000211
a0(980)- PDGid=-9000211
a0(980)0 PDGid=9000111
a1(1260)+ PDGid=20213
a1(1260)- PDGid=-20213
a1(1260)0 PDGid=20113
a2(1320)+ PDGid=215

a2(1320)- PDGid=-215
a2(1320)0 PDGid=115
alpha PDGid=1000020040
anti_B0 PDGid=-511
anti_Bs0 PDGid=-531
anti_D0 PDGid=-421
anti_N(1440)+ PDGid=-12212
anti_N(1440)0 PDGid=-12112
anti_N(1520)+ PDGid=-2124
anti_N(1520)0 PDGid=-1214
anti_N(1535)+ PDGid=-22212
anti_N(1535)0 PDGid=-22112
anti_N(1650)+ PDGid=-32212
anti_N(1650)0 PDGid=-32112
anti_N(1675)+ PDGid=-2216
anti_N(1675)0 PDGid=-2116
anti_N(1680)+ PDGid=-12216
anti_N(1680)0 PDGid=-12116
anti_N(1700)+ PDGid=-22124
anti_N(1700)0 PDGid=-21214
anti_N(1710)+ PDGid=-42212
anti_N(1710)0 PDGid=-42112
anti_N(1720)+ PDGid=-32124
anti_N(1720)0 PDGid=-31214
anti_N(1900)+ PDGid=-42124
anti_N(1900)0 PDGid=-41214
anti_N(1990)+ PDGid=-12218
anti_N(1990)0 PDGid=-12118
anti_N(2090)+ PDGid=-52214
anti_N(2090)0 PDGid=-52114
anti_N(2190)+ PDGid=-2128
anti_N(2190)0 PDGid=-1218
anti_N(2220)+ PDGid=-100002210
anti_N(2220)0 PDGid=-100002110
anti_N(2250)+ PDGid=-100012210
anti_N(2250)0 PDGid=-100012110
anti_b_quark PDGid=-5
anti_c_quark PDGid=-4
anti_d_quark PDGid=-1
anti_dd1_diquark PDGid=-1103
anti_delta(1600)+ PDGid=-32214
anti_delta(1600)++ PDGid=-32224
anti_delta(1600)- PDGid=-31114
anti_delta(1600)0 PDGid=-32114
anti_delta(1620)+ PDGid=-2122
anti_delta(1620)++ PDGid=-2222
anti_delta(1620)- PDGid=-1112
anti_delta(1620)0 PDGid=-1212
anti_delta(1700)+ PDGid=-12214
anti_delta(1700)++ PDGid=-12224
anti_delta(1700)- PDGid=-11114
anti_delta(1700)0 PDGid=-12114
anti_delta(1900)+ PDGid=-12122
anti_delta(1900)++ PDGid=-12222
anti_delta(1900)- PDGid=-11112

anti_delta(1900)0 PDGid=-11212
anti_delta(1905)+ PDGid=-2126
anti_delta(1905)++ PDGid=-2226
anti_delta(1905)- PDGid=-1116
anti_delta(1905)0 PDGid=-1216
anti_delta(1910)+ PDGid=-22122
anti_delta(1910)++ PDGid=-22222
anti_delta(1910)- PDGid=-21112
anti_delta(1910)0 PDGid=-21212
anti_delta(1920)+ PDGid=-22214
anti_delta(1920)++ PDGid=-22224
anti_delta(1920)- PDGid=-21114
anti_delta(1920)0 PDGid=-22114
anti_delta(1930)+ PDGid=-12126
anti_delta(1930)++ PDGid=-12226
anti_delta(1930)- PDGid=-11116
anti_delta(1930)0 PDGid=-11216
anti_delta(1950)+ PDGid=-2218
anti_delta(1950)++ PDGid=-2228
anti_delta(1950)- PDGid=-1118
anti_delta(1950)0 PDGid=-2118
anti_delta+ PDGid=-2214
anti_delta++ PDGid=-2224
anti_delta- PDGid=-1114
anti_delta0 PDGid=-2114
anti_k(1460)0 PDGid=-100311
anti_k0_star(1430)0 PDGid=-10311
anti_k1(1270)0 PDGid=-10313
anti_k1(1400)0 PDGid=-20313
anti_k2(1770)0 PDGid=-10315
anti_k2_star(1430)0 PDGid=-315
anti_k2_star(1980)0 PDGid=-100315
anti_k3_star(1780)0 PDGid=-317
anti_k_star(1410)0 PDGid=-100313
anti_k_star(1680)0 PDGid=-30313
anti_k_star0 PDGid=-313
anti_kaon0 PDGid=-311
anti_lambda PDGid=-3122
anti_lambda(1405) PDGid=-13122
anti_lambda(1520) PDGid=-3124
anti_lambda(1600) PDGid=-23122
anti_lambda(1670) PDGid=-33122
anti_lambda(1690) PDGid=-13124
anti_lambda(1800) PDGid=-43122
anti_lambda(1810) PDGid=-53122
anti_lambda(1820) PDGid=-3126
anti_lambda(1830) PDGid=-13126
anti_lambda(1890) PDGid=-23124
anti_lambda(2100) PDGid=-3128
anti_lambda(2110) PDGid=-23126
anti_lambda_c+ PDGid=-4122
anti_neutron PDGid=-2112
anti_nu_e PDGid=-12
anti_nu_mu PDGid=-14
anti_nu_tau PDGid=-16

anti_omega- PDGid=-3334
anti_omega_c0 PDGid=-4332
anti_proton PDGid=-2212
anti_s_quark PDGid=-3
anti_sd0_diquark PDGid=-3101
anti_sd1_diquark PDGid=-3103
anti_sigma(1385)+ PDGid=-3224
anti_sigma(1385)- PDGid=-3114
anti_sigma(1385)0 PDGid=-3214
anti_sigma(1660)+ PDGid=-13222
anti_sigma(1660)- PDGid=-13112
anti_sigma(1660)0 PDGid=-13212
anti_sigma(1670)+ PDGid=-13224
anti_sigma(1670)- PDGid=-13114
anti_sigma(1670)0 PDGid=-13214
anti_sigma(1750)+ PDGid=-23222
anti_sigma(1750)- PDGid=-23112
anti_sigma(1750)0 PDGid=-23212
anti_sigma(1775)+ PDGid=-3226
anti_sigma(1775)- PDGid=-3116
anti_sigma(1775)0 PDGid=-3216
anti_sigma(1915)+ PDGid=-13226
anti_sigma(1915)- PDGid=-13116
anti_sigma(1915)0 PDGid=-13216
anti_sigma(1940)+ PDGid=-23224
anti_sigma(1940)- PDGid=-23114
anti_sigma(1940)0 PDGid=-23214
anti_sigma(2030)+ PDGid=-3228
anti_sigma(2030)- PDGid=-3118
anti_sigma(2030)0 PDGid=-3218
anti_sigma+ PDGid=-3222
anti_sigma- PDGid=-3112
anti_sigma0 PDGid=-3212
anti_sigma_c+ PDGid=-4212
anti_sigma_c++ PDGid=-4222
anti_sigma_c0 PDGid=-4112
anti_ss1_diquark PDGid=-3303
anti_su0_diquark PDGid=-3201
anti_su1_diquark PDGid=-3203
anti_t_quark PDGid=-6
anti_u_quark PDGid=-2
anti_ud0_diquark PDGid=-2101
anti_ud1_diquark PDGid=-2103
anti_uu1_diquark PDGid=-2203
anti_xi(1530)- PDGid=-3314
anti_xi(1530)0 PDGid=-3324
anti_xi(1690)- PDGid=-23314
anti_xi(1690)0 PDGid=-23324
anti_xi(1820)- PDGid=-13314
anti_xi(1820)0 PDGid=-13324
anti_xi(1950)- PDGid=-33314
anti_xi(1950)0 PDGid=-33324
anti_xi(2030)- PDGid=-13316
anti_xi(2030)0 PDGid=-13326
anti_xi- PDGid=-3312

anti_xi0 PDGid=-3322
anti_xi_c+ PDGid=-4232
anti_xi_c0 PDGid=-4132
b1(1235)+ PDGid=10213
b1(1235)- PDGid=-10213
b1(1235)0 PDGid=10113
b_quark PDGid=5
c_quark PDGid=4
chargedgeantino PDGid=0
d_quark PDGid=1
dd1_diquark PDGid=1103
delta(1600)+ PDGid=32214
delta(1600)++ PDGid=32224
delta(1600)- PDGid=31114
delta(1600)0 PDGid=32114
delta(1620)+ PDGid=2122
delta(1620)++ PDGid=2222
delta(1620)- PDGid=1112
delta(1620)0 PDGid=1212
delta(1700)+ PDGid=12214
delta(1700)++ PDGid=12224
delta(1700)- PDGid=11114
delta(1700)0 PDGid=12114
delta(1900)+ PDGid=12122
delta(1900)++ PDGid=12222
delta(1900)- PDGid=11112
delta(1900)0 PDGid=11212
delta(1905)+ PDGid=2126
delta(1905)++ PDGid=2226
delta(1905)- PDGid=1116
delta(1905)0 PDGid=1216
delta(1910)+ PDGid=22122
delta(1910)++ PDGid=22222
delta(1910)- PDGid=21112
delta(1910)0 PDGid=21212
delta(1920)+ PDGid=22214
delta(1920)++ PDGid=22224
delta(1920)- PDGid=21114
delta(1920)0 PDGid=22114
delta(1930)+ PDGid=12126
delta(1930)++ PDGid=12226
delta(1930)- PDGid=11116
delta(1930)0 PDGid=11216
delta(1950)+ PDGid=2218
delta(1950)++ PDGid=2228
delta(1950)- PDGid=1118
delta(1950)0 PDGid=2118
delta+ PDGid=2214
delta++ PDGid=2224
delta- PDGid=1114
delta0 PDGid=2114
deuteron PDGid=1000010020
e+ PDGid=-11
e- PDGid=11
eta PDGid=221

eta(1295) PDGid=100221
eta(1405) PDGid=9020221
eta(1475) PDGid=100331
eta2(1645) PDGid=10225
eta2(1870) PDGid=10335
eta_prime PDGid=331
f0(1370) PDGid=10221
f0(1500) PDGid=9030221
f0(1710) PDGid=10331
f0(600) PDGid=9000221
f0(980) PDGid=9010221
f1(1285) PDGid=20223
f1(1420) PDGid=20333
f2(1270) PDGid=225
f2(1810) PDGid=9030225
f2(2010) PDGid=9060225
f2_prime(1525) PDGid=335
gamma PDGid=22
geantino PDGid=0
gluon PDGid=21
h1(1170) PDGid=10223
h1(1380) PDGid=10333
k(1460)+ PDGid=100321
k(1460)- PDGid=-100321
k(1460)0 PDGid=100311
k0_star(1430)+ PDGid=10321
k0_star(1430)- PDGid=-10321
k0_star(1430)0 PDGid=10311
k1(1270)+ PDGid=10323
k1(1270)- PDGid=-10323
k1(1270)0 PDGid=10313
k1(1400)+ PDGid=20323
k1(1400)- PDGid=-20323
k1(1400)0 PDGid=20313
k2(1770)+ PDGid=10325
k2(1770)- PDGid=-10325
k2(1770)0 PDGid=10315
k2_star(1430)+ PDGid=325
k2_star(1430)- PDGid=-325
k2_star(1430)0 PDGid=315
k2_star(1980)+ PDGid=100325
k2_star(1980)- PDGid=-100325
k2_star(1980)0 PDGid=100315
k3_star(1780)+ PDGid=327
k3_star(1780)- PDGid=-327
k3_star(1780)0 PDGid=317
k_star(1410)+ PDGid=100323
k_star(1410)- PDGid=-100323
k_star(1410)0 PDGid=100313
k_star(1680)+ PDGid=30323
k_star(1680)- PDGid=-30323
k_star(1680)0 PDGid=30313
k_star+ PDGid=323
k_star- PDGid=-323
k_star0 PDGid=313

kaon+ PDGid=321
kaon- PDGid=-321
kaon0 PDGid=311
kaon0L PDGid=130
kaon0S PDGid=310
lambda PDGid=3122
lambda(1405) PDGid=13122
lambda(1520) PDGid=3124
lambda(1600) PDGid=23122
lambda(1670) PDGid=33122
lambda(1690) PDGid=13124
lambda(1800) PDGid=43122
lambda(1810) PDGid=53122
lambda(1820) PDGid=3126
lambda(1830) PDGid=13126
lambda(1890) PDGid=23124
lambda(2100) PDGid=3128
lambda(2110) PDGid=23126
lambda_c+ PDGid=4122
mu+ PDGid=-13
mu- PDGid=13
neutron PDGid=2112
nu_e PDGid=12
nu_mu PDGid=14
nu_tau PDGid=16
omega PDGid=223
omega(1420) PDGid=100223
omega(1650) PDGid=30223
omega- PDGid=3334
omega3(1670) PDGid=227
omega_c0 PDGid=4332
opticalphoton PDGid=0
phi PDGid=333
phi(1680) PDGid=100333
phi3(1850) PDGid=337
pi(1300)+ PDGid=100211
pi(1300)- PDGid=-100211
pi(1300)0 PDGid=100111
pi+ PDGid=211
pi- PDGid=-211
pi0 PDGid=111
pi2(1670)+ PDGid=10215
pi2(1670)- PDGid=-10215
pi2(1670)0 PDGid=10115
proton PDGid=2212
rho(1450)+ PDGid=100213
rho(1450)- PDGid=-100213
rho(1450)0 PDGid=100113
rho(1700)+ PDGid=30213
rho(1700)- PDGid=-30213
rho(1700)0 PDGid=30113
rho+ PDGid=213
rho- PDGid=-213
rho0 PDGid=113
rho3(1690)+ PDGid=217

rho3(1690)- PDGid=-217
rho3(1690)0 PDGid=117
s_quark PDGid=3
sd0_diquark PDGid=3101
sd1_diquark PDGid=3103
sigma(1385)+ PDGid=3224
sigma(1385)- PDGid=3114
sigma(1385)0 PDGid=3214
sigma(1660)+ PDGid=13222
sigma(1660)- PDGid=13112
sigma(1660)0 PDGid=13212
sigma(1670)+ PDGid=13224
sigma(1670)- PDGid=13114
sigma(1670)0 PDGid=13214
sigma(1750)+ PDGid=23222
sigma(1750)- PDGid=23112
sigma(1750)0 PDGid=23212
sigma(1775)+ PDGid=3226
sigma(1775)- PDGid=3116
sigma(1775)0 PDGid=3216
sigma(1915)+ PDGid=13226
sigma(1915)- PDGid=13116
sigma(1915)0 PDGid=13216
sigma(1940)+ PDGid=23224
sigma(1940)- PDGid=23114
sigma(1940)0 PDGid=23214
sigma(2030)+ PDGid=3228
sigma(2030)- PDGid=3118
sigma(2030)0 PDGid=3218
sigma+ PDGid=3222
sigma- PDGid=3112
sigma0 PDGid=3212
sigma_c+ PDGid=4212
sigma_c++ PDGid=4222
sigma_c0 PDGid=4112
ss1_diquark PDGid=3303
su0_diquark PDGid=3201
su1_diquark PDGid=3203
t_quark PDGid=6
tau+ PDGid=-15
tau- PDGid=15
triton PDGid=1000010030
u_quark PDGid=2
ud0_diquark PDGid=2101
ud1_diquark PDGid=2103
uu1_diquark PDGid=2203
xi(1530)- PDGid=3314
xi(1530)0 PDGid=3324
xi(1690)- PDGid=23314
xi(1690)0 PDGid=23324
xi(1820)- PDGid=13314
xi(1820)0 PDGid=13324
xi(1950)- PDGid=33314
xi(1950)0 PDGid=33324
xi(2030)- PDGid=13316

xi(2030)0 PDGid=13326
xi- PDGid=3312
xi0 PDGid=3322
xi_c+ PDGid=4232
xi_c0 PDGid=4132

Appendix 5 – Error Messages
Errors and warnings generated during execution are handled by the G4Exception function; they are
printed as a 7-line message starting and ending with a row of asterisks – that makes them stand out
visually in a long printout. Those that are issued by a routine beginning with “G4” came from Geant4
code, while those issued by a routine beginning with “BL” came from G4beamline code; those that are
issued by a command name are also from G4beamline code. This list may not be complete; it does not
attempt to list all error messages from libraries such as Geant4, CLHEP, GSL, OpenInventor, OpenGL,
FFTW, Xwindows, etc.

Exception
Severity
Discussion
001
Warning
G4HadronicProcess – this is a coding error and is being
investigated by the Geant4 team. It is rare and can be
ignored unless a large number of tracks are affected
Alarm Signal
Fatal
The alarm timer fired. This timer is set 10 seconds longer
than the eventTimeLimit, and will only fire if no steps were
taken during those extra 10 seconds. Usually indicates an
infinite loop somewhere in the program.
Missing material
Fatal
The specified material cannot be found.
UnknownParticle
Fatal
The specified particle does not exist.
Cannot Tune
Fatal
The pillbox cannot be tuned properly.
Tune Iteration Limit
Fatal
The pillbox tuning did not converge.
Invalid Step
Fatal
The pillbox tuning made an invalid step.
Tuning failed to converge Fatal
Tuning did not converge.
Overwriting input file
Fatal
The trackermode filename is the same as the parameter
histoFile, which will overwrite the previous run’s Root file.
Duplicate trackerplane-s
Fatal
Two or more trackerplane-s have the same name.
No Trackers
Fatal
The trackermode command has no trackers to control.
Invalid Start Expr
Fatal
The tune command has an invalid argument.
Iteration Limit
Fatal
The tune command did not converge within the limit.
Invalid Tune Expr
Fatal
The tune command has an invalid argument.
Failed to Converge
Fatal
The tune command did not converge.
Out of Memory
Fatal
Not enough memory.
Failed to achieve required
accuracy
Fatal
The coil command could not achieve the required accuracy
in constructing the field map, given the limits on its size.
Material not found
Fatal
The named material does not exist.
Invalid Coordinate Type
Fatal
Invalid coordinate argument
Invalid init during
tracking
Event
Internal coding error.
Invalid start
Fatal
The start command is not valid.
Cannot determine
reference coordinate
segment
Event
The reference coordinates are not unique at the start of this
track. Probably means that radiusCut is omitted or too large
in some corner or cornerarc command.
Coordinate Object
Missing
Event
Internal coding error.

Reference Coordinates
not available
Fatal
Reference coordinates specified, but no applicable reference
particle was tracked.
Output File Exists
Fatal
To prevent confusion BLFieldMap will not overwrite an
existing file.
Nesting > 64
Fatal
Groups can only be nested to 64 levels.
Object Already Exists
Fatal
The name of an object is not unique.
Already Initialized
Fatal
Internal coding error.
No Physics Registered
Fatal
No physics command in the input file.
No beam Registered
Fatal
No beam command (or other beam).
G4VIS_USE not defined
Fatal
Attempt to use visualization, but the program has no
visualization compiled into it.
Coordinates got lost
Event
Internal coding error.
Stuck Track
Track
A track has taken >100 steps without moving significantly.
This is usually a very low energy track on a boundary.
Event time limit
Event
Simulating the event has taken more real time than the
parameter eventTimeLimit.
Erroneous call to …
Fatal
Internal coding error.
Cannot find NTuple
Fatal
NTuple name not found in Root file.
Cannot run beam
Fatal
Internal coding error.
Geometry not closed
Fatal
Internal coding error.
Cannot read viewers.def
Fatal
Visualization requested, but cannot find the file viewers.def
that defines the viewers (it is normally in the G4beamline
install directory).
Viewer not defined
Fatal
A viewer was requested that does not exist.
Large Primary TrackID
Warning
A beam track was read with TrackID > 1000, which can be
confused with new secondary tracks having such TrackID-s.
See section 7.14.

References
[1] Geant4 – http://geant4.cern.ch

[2] CLHEP – http://proj-clhep.web.cern.ch/proj-clhep

[3] HistoScope – http://fermitools.fnal.gov/abstracts/histoscope/abstract.html

[4] The MICE Collaboration – http://mice.iit.edu

[5] Root – http://root.cern.ch

[6] “Beam simulation tools for GEANT4 (and neutrino source applications)”, hep-ex/0210057

[7] Cygwin – http://www.cygwin.com

[8] ffmpeg – http://www.ffmpeg.org

[9] Qt – The Qt library – http://qt.io

[10] Gnuplot –  http://www.gnuplot.info/

[11] OpenMPI – http://openmpi.org

[12] NERSC: http://nersc.gov, the supercomputer itself is http://hopper.nersc.gov.

[13] Cosy Infinity: http://www.bt.pa.msu.edu/index_cosy.htm

[14] ICOOL: https://www.cap.bnl.gov/ICOOL/
