## 8.4 Getting Help on Individual G4beamline Commands

8 Tips and Techniques
These generally useful tips and techniques have been found useful while using G4beamline to simulate
several dozen different systems, including suggestions from numerous users.
### 8.1 Getting Help on Using G4beamline – Users Forum

The primary means of obtaining assistance in using G4beamline is our users forum,
https://groups.google.com/a/muonsinc.com/d/forum/g4beamline (membership required, to join
mailto:g4beamline+subscribe@muonsinc.com).

Some questions are more about Geant4 than G4beamline. In particular, detailed questions about physics
processes and/or physics lists are in this category. For such questions, you can use the previous
paragraph, but we will most likely redirect you to the Geant4 forums:
http://hypernews.slac.stanford.edu/HyperNews/geant4/cindex. It’s quite appropriate for users of
G4beamline to join the Geant4 forums as well.
### 8.2 Reporting Bugs in G4beamline

Please report bugs in our users forum (see section 8.1).
### 8.3 Requesting New Features in G4beamline

Please request new features in our users forum (see section 8.1).

The source code of each G4beamline command includes help text for the command and its individual
arguments; it is printed by the help command. This text is the primary source of information about the
command, and is copied into this User’s Guide and into the help text of the G4beamline GUI. You can
obtain help on each command in several ways:
1. From a command line type “g4bl –“ on one line, and then “help command” on a new line in
response to the cmd: prompt.
2. Run the G4beamline GUI, and if the help text is not displayed, push the Help button. You can
then scroll around and find the desired command.
3. Look in section 6 of this document.
Note that the definitive source is number 1, so if there is a question about changes (e.g. in different
versions of G4beamline), that is the method to use. In particular, the help text in the GUI and in this
document can get out of date.
### 8.5 In what Directory should I Work?

In general, it is a poor idea to put your simulations inside the G4beamline install directory – that makes
it difficult to update G4beamline; similarly, the G4beamlineExamples directory is not a good place to
work (except to run the examples). It is usually a good idea to work under your $HOME directory, and
