## 8.7 Basic Execution in a Command-Line Environment

to make a separate directory for each simulation; this is especially true if you are using the GUI. I have a
single directory in my $HOME called g4work under which I create a new directory for each new
simulation, using a descriptive name.
### 8.6 Files Common to Multiple Simulations

Many G4beamline commands reference additional files. In some cases there will be a collection of
different simulations that share common files, such as field maps, window profiles, etc. It may be
convenient to put these files into a single directory called “Common” at the same level as the simulation
directories. Then in each input file, reference these common files as “../Common/filename.ext”.

Most modern desktop environments permit the user to have multiple command-line windows open
simultaneously. This can significantly improve your productivity while developing a new G4beamline
simulation, or optimizing parameters of an existing one. Multiple windows are not necessary, and what I
describe in parallel can be performed sequentially in a single command-line window; it is noticeably
more efficient with multiple windows, however.

Usually when developing a new simulation, or optimizing the parameters or configuration of a
simulation, one wants to see histograms or plots from each run before tweaking the input.file and
running another test run. The idea is to run enough events to get statistically meaningful plots, but to not
take too long so one can iterate rapidly through choices. For a simple system being simulated, I can
often perform the loop of “edit, simulate, histogram, choose new values” in less than a minute per step. I
do this with four windows open simultaneously, all running bash in the same directory:
W1. A command-line window in which I run G4beamline simulations.
W2. A command-line window in which I run “g4bl –“ and to which I type “help command”
whenever I need help on a command or its arguments.
W3. A command-line window in which I edit my current input.file. I happen to use vi, but you
should use the editor you are most familiar with.
W4. A command-line window in which I run historoot. This can be window 1 if historoot is put in
the background.

It’s best to use a monitor that is big enough to see all four windows at once, but it works well if you can
see all of one and parts of the others, so you can rapidly switch windows with a mouse click. The basic
sequence is:
1. W3 (editor): If it’s not open already, open input.file in the editor and prepare the next version to
try. Use W2 (help) for help if necessary. When finished, save the file to disk without exiting the
editor.
2. W1 (command prompt): run “g4bl input.file” and wait for it to finish. If there was an error, go
back to step 1.
3. W4 (historoot): do File/OpenFile and open g4beamline.root (or whatever file the simulation
wrote). Select the desired NTuple and set the expressions to plot (if necessary – the plot
configuration will remain from the previous iteration), and then push CreatePlot.
