## 8.8 Basic Execution in a GUI Environment

4. W4 (historoot): do File/CloseAllFiles. This is important to avoid confusion. On Windows this is
essential, because if historoot has the Root file open, g4beamline won’t be able to write to it and
the next step 2 will fail for that reason.
5. Examine the plot and determine what to do next. Go back to step 1.

By using separate command-line windows, the command-line history in each will permit you to avoid
re-typing commands, reducing typos and speeding things up considerably. By keeping historoot and the
editor open, you avoid the delay of re-configuring them each time.

When constructing a new geometry, plots are usually not needed, and the GUI is better suited to
viewing the system easily. So in window 1 I type “g4blgui input.file” and push its Run button instead of
running g4bl directly (with the best viewer selected). W4 (historoot) is not used. I find that the GUI is
easier to use than the command-line when using visualization (though it works fine to type “g4bl
input.file viewer=best”, and then “/run/beamOn 10” to the Geant4 Idle> prompt). If your input.file has
no beam command, “g4bl input.file viewer=best” will display the system immediately, without running
any events.

Execution in a GUI environment, such as Windows, is similar to that in a command-line environment
discussed above. The basic idea is to keep windows open so you don’t constantly have to re-configure
them.

Usually when developing a new simulation, or optimizing the parameters or configuration of a
simulation, one wants to see histograms or plots from each run before tweaking the input.file and
running another test run. The idea is to run enough events to get statistically meaningful plots, but to not
take too long so one can iterate rapidly through choices. For a simple system being simulated, I can
often perform the loop of “edit, simulate, histogram, choose new values” in less than a minute per step. I
do this with four windows open simultaneously, all in the same directory:
1. The G4beamline GUI window.
2. (Optional) The G4beamline User’s Guide in a PDF viewer. A PDF viewer makes it easier to scan
the text for command names. Can be omitted and the help text of W1 can be used instead.
3. An editor window to edit the current input.file.
4. The historoot window.

It’s best to use a monitor that is big enough to see all four windows at once, but it works well if you can
see all of one and parts of the others, so you can rapidly switch windows with a mouse click. The basic
sequence is:
1. W3 (editor): If it’s not open already, open input.file in the editor and prepare the next version to
try. Use W2 (help) for help if necessary. When finished, save the file to disk without exiting the
editor.
2. W1 (G4beamline GUI): If input.file is not already selected, do so with the Browse button or
File/Open menu. Push the Run button to run the simulation. If there was an error, go back to
step 1.
