## 8.9 Putting Shielding into a Simulation

3. W4 (historoot): do File/OpenFile and open g4beamline.root (or whatever file the simulation
wrote). Select the desired NTuple and push CreatePlot (the plot configuration will remain from
the previous iteration).
4. W4 (historoot): do File/CloseAllFiles. This is important to avoid confusion. On Windows this is
essential, because if historoot has the .root file open, g4beamline won’t be able to write to it and
the next step 2 will fail for that reason.
5. Examine the plot and determine what to do next. Go back to step 1.

G4beamline is a realistic simulation program, and just like a real beamline, one must provide
appropriate shielding. While obviously there are no radiation issues in a simulation, it is necessary to
provide shielding that is sufficient to prevent particles from traveling in unexpected places. This is
particularly troublesome for secondary particles from decays and interactions, as they often have
sufficient transverse momentum to quickly leave many beamline apertures, and even get outside the
outer dimensions of magnets. Particles that go in unexpected places and directions can confuse plots and
histograms, and can waste CPU time on irrelevant particles.

Probably the best and simplest approach is to use the radiusCut argument to the start, corner, and
cornerarc commands. This puts a virtual cylinder around the centerline of the beamline, killing all
particles that exceed the current radiusCut. You may need to use an unusually large radiusCut inside a
bending magnet paired with a cornerarc, so be sure to check this visually. If everything within the
radiusCut is either the beam aperture or elements with kill=1, then this will ensure that unusual paths
outside the nominal beam aperture only extend between elements, which is usually sufficient. Make sure
the elements fill the radiusCut, or particles could go around them. Note that a corner without object or
rotation can be used to change the radiusCut at a specified value of z (centerline coordinates).

Another common approach is to use the kill=1 argument to bending magnets, quadrupole magnets, beam
pipes, etc. This makes them kill any particles that hit their solid parts, providing shielding for many
situations. You can add specific objects just for shielding, such as a box, cylinder, or tubs. It is usually
sufficient to enclose the entire beamline with elements and pipes having kill=1.

In many cases, the beam pipes are not of interest in a simulation, and putting them in is often more effort
than it is worth. Then you must take care that particles do not take unintended paths. For instance, it is
rather common for a particle to take a “shortcut” around a bending magnet, so be sure to check for this.
Rings are obviously subject to this. Shielding can be any element with kill=1, most often box or tubs
(the latter is particularly convenient as it can be given a hole for the intended beam); it is often
convenient to set color=invisible, but don’t do that until you have looked at it to know it is appropriately
sized and placed. A tubs or box with a thickness of 0.001 mm or more and kill=1 is a perfect shield (i.e.
kills every particle that hits it).

If you have varying magnetic fields, sometimes they create a trap that can store particles for a long time
(1 microsecond is a long time). These are usually uninteresting, but can become CPU hogs. Using the
maxTime argument to the trackcuts command can reduce their effect.
